--- 3. The Platform ---

Eng. Proc. 2021, 9, 10
3 of 5
3. The Platform
The circular production system can receive and process all the information from each
subsystem installed at every production level in the farm and provides the results in a
simple and manageable form, supporting users to make appropriate decisions (Figure 3).
Examples of input data include: (a) for the crop production sub-system—weather and
soil moisture data from IoT, satellite and drone images, and crop and soil properties
mapping proximal sensor data; (b) for the feed production sub-system—silage moisture
and temperature data from IoT; (c) for the animal production sub-system—animal housing
environmental conditions (temperature, humidity, CO2 and methane concentrations, etc.)
monitored using IoT sensing systems, animal health status (temperature, activity, and
behavior) using wireless IoT-enabled collars; (d) for the animal waste treatment sub-
system—waste volume, waste water content and temperature, produced volume of biogas
(if equipped with biogas production facilities), using IoT systems.

(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Some of the basic functions of the platform; (a) automated mapping of within-ﬁeld crop properties and (b) mapping
of environmental conditions inside the animal housing facilities.
4. Crop Production Experiments
Crop production is the initial production stage in a circular dairy system and consists
of the ﬁrst sub-system in BIOCIRCULAR. Within the scope of the project, ﬁeld experi-
ments were setup to study and develop management practices that may lead to increased
production efﬁciency by minimizing the environmental footprint. In this work, the yield
response of maize crop (Zea mays L.), grown for forage, to the application of different
types of fertilizer (organic—manure and green manure; chemical fertilizers) was also
investigated. Two maize hybrids were included in the study, namely Dekalb6777 and
Pioneer1291. Five different fertilization treatments were tested: green manure (organic),
manure (organic), conventional fertilizer (synthetic), slow-release fertilizer (synthetic), and
control (no fertilizer applied).
The results showed that cattle manure can provide the nutrients in an available
form that are essential for plant growth, while enhancing soil water-retention properties,
leading to increased productivity of maize (Figure 4). Additionally, green manure with
common vetch can provide adequate amounts of nitrogen, which is very important for
maize. Therefore, efﬁcient management of natural resources together with integrative crop
management approaches can reduce inputs in crop production systems.