--- A Smart Farming System for Circular Agriculture ---

Proceeding Paper
A Smart Farming System for Circular Agriculture †
Aristotelis C. Tagarakis 1,*
, Christos Dordas 2
, Maria Lampridi 1
, Dimitrios Kateris 1
and Dionysis Bochtis 1

Citation: Tagarakis, A.C.; Dordas, C.;
Lampridi, M.; Kateris, D.; Bochtis, D.
A Smart Farming System for Circular
Agriculture. Eng. Proc. 2021, 9, 10.
https://doi.org/10.3390/engproc
2021009010
Academic Editors: Charisios Achillas
and Dimitios Aidonis
Published: 24 November 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1
Centre for Research and Technology-Hellas (CERTH), Institute for Bio-Economy and Agri-Technology (IBO),
6th km Charilaou-Thermi Rd., GR 57001 Thessaloniki, Greece; m.lampridi@certh.gr (M.L.);
d.kateris@certh.gr (D.K.); d.bochtis@certh.gr (D.B.)
2
School of Agriculture, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece;
chdordas@agro.auth.gr
*
Correspondence: a.tagarakis@certh.gr
†
Presented at the 13th EFITA International Conference, online, 25–26 May 2021.
Abstract: Agricultural activities such as fertilization and other crop management techniques con-
tribute to greenhouse gas emissions and pollution; the cost of such activities is considerably high,
with nitrogen pollution costing the EU up to 320 billion euros annually. In the present study, an
integrated system has been proposed which utilizes smart farming tools and smart processing
methodologies following the concept of a circular economy to reduce the impact of agricultural
activity on climate change. Circular agriculture and precision farming together with the use of
appropriate crop management tools may contribute to better resource use efﬁciency and sustainable
agriculture.
Keywords: bioeconomy; circular agriculture; precision farming; smart farming; fertilization; resource
use efﬁciency; sustainability
1. Introduction
Climate change is a major threat for the natural environment, and there is an impera-
tive need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Agriculture contributes for about 10% of
the greenhouse gas emissions and up to 95% of the emissions of ammonia in the European
Union [1]. In order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, new management approaches,
such as circular agriculture, should be adapted, and new technologies that can minimize
inputs for crop production must be developed and utilized. Circular agriculture is a mod-
ern agricultural management concept that promotes the reuse of all resources that can be
used by the production system itself [2–4]. The utilization of such systems directly leads
to the minimization of agricultural waste, while their application can reduce nutrient and
water losses and emissions such as greenhouse gasses [4].
The latest advances in sensing and communication systems in agriculture have paved
the way towards developing and following more efﬁcient management schemes that
account for the temporal and spatial variability of ﬁeld and crop properties for timely and
accurate ﬁeld applications [5]. To be able to take advantage of these advanced sensing and
management tools, the development of integrated systems with user-friendly interfaces is
a prerequisite. As such, precision farming technologies can be utilized in conjunction with
Internet of Things (IoT) sensing systems, in both crop and animal production processes, to
feed the integrated system with real-time data [4,6].
In this study, a holistic system for circular agriculture is proposed (BIOCIRCULAR) to
be applied at small–medium vertical production dairy farms. Part of the system involves
integrated soil fertility management which combines the use of appropriate amounts
of organic and inorganic fertilizers together with green manure and good agronomic
practices [4,6,7]. Preliminary results of the crop fertilization study for crops grown for feed
(Zea mays L.), as part of the crop production sub-system, are also discussed.
Eng. Proc. 2021, 9, 10. https://doi.org/10.3390/engproc2021009010
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/engproc