--- A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada ---

Achieving Canada’s aggressive growth targets for agri-food exports, concurrent with making progress on the government’s ambitions for a 30% reduction in methane emissions by 2030, net-zero emissions by 2050, and overall improvements in environmental quality indicators and food security means that more food will need to be produced with a smaller environmental footprint. While this is a tall order it is not impossible. Done right, it can unlock significant opportunity and create new value.

The agriculture and agri-food sector is a cornerstone of the Canadian economy, accounting for 7.4% of GDP and one in eight jobs. In 2018, it generated $59.4 billion worth of export sales, making it the fifth largest exporter of agriculture and agri-food products in the world. Canada’s ambition is to grow these exports to at least $75 billion by 2025.

Can this growth ambition be squared with environmental goals?  The sector has a significant impact on water, soil quality, biodiversity and climate. In 2019, agriculture alone contributed to 8% of Canada’s GHG emissions. An estimated 58% of all the food produced in Canada goes uneaten as a result of being lost or wasted across the food value chain. Much of this ends up in landfill where it generates methane and contributes to another 2% of national emissions. At the same time, at least four million Canadians, including 1.15 million children, are food insecure; a figure that does not even include three groups at high risk of food insecurity: people living on First Nations reserves, people in some remote northern areas, and people who are homeless.

The circular economy model presents a vision for meeting the needs of an increasingly populous and wealthy global society within the safe boundaries of key ecological systems and processes. This model has been gaining traction across the globe as a means to build a more sustainable and equitable economy. It is based on three principles: (i) eliminating waste and pollution, (ii) circulating biomaterials and products, and (iii) regenerating natural systems. These principles and their related strategies have much to offer to Canada’s agriculture and agri-food economy.

This report aims to inform future research and policy recommendations to support the transition to a more circular agriculture and agri-food sector in Canada. It synthesizes academic and practitioner literature on the subject, including best practices, benefits, barriers, and policy supports.

Key Findings:

Read the report