--- perspective. The Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests ---

26 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Enable farmers to overcome barriers to change Land use and management play a crucial role in improving agricultural practices to address food security and climate change. Improving land management, soil fertility, or practices like implementing agro-forestry have long-term benefits but often imply up front costs either in inputs or labour. Securing land tenure is paramount to enable farmers to benefit from the value added on the land and to encourage them in adopting a long-term perspective. The Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security7 recently adopted by the Committee on World Food Security promote secure tenure rights and equitable access to land, fisheries and forests as a means of eradicating hunger and poverty, supporting sustainable development and enhancing the environment. They can play an important role.

Whatever the change in farming systems envisaged or implemented, it involves costs. Even if a new practice will provide the same or an increased income in the long run, there are barriers to adoption: upfront costs, in- come foregone during the transition period or additional risks during the transition period which all have to be covered. Take for instance mitigation measures. Mitigation measures in the agricultural sector are considered among the cheapest, with a quarter of the technical mitigation potential being estimated as costing less than 20$/tCO2 (IPCC, 2007b). But these estimations compare the income with a new practice to the income without the practice. They do not take into account transition costs, or the costs of the enabling environment, such as extension services for instance. These costs have to be assessed and taken into account (FAO, 2009a).

The recent report of the High Level Panel of Experts on food security and nutrition on Social Protection for Food Security (HLPE, 2012b) shows how social protection can be a powerful means to enable farmers, and especially the more vulnerable, to invest and modify their practices to improve their food security. Many meas- ures, such as providing inputs or public works to improve infrastructures and landscapes have both direct short term and longer term impacts. In cash subsidies provided as social protection are often used to invest for improving livelihoods (HLPE, 2012b). Moreover an integrated and up-scalable social protection system is essential to enable investment particularly of the more vulnerable.

It is also essential to facilitate access to the needed knowledge, including for local specific practices, through the development and improvement of extension services and initiatives such as farmer field schools and for- mal and informal knowledge sharing networks (HLPE, 2012).

Need for a systemic approach The changes required in agricultural and food systems will require the creation of supporting institutions and enterprises to provide services and inputs to smallholders, fishermen and pastoralists, and transform and commercialize their production more efficiently. These changes will also require major investments from both public and private sector. For this reason, they will drive economic development and create jobs, especially in rural areas and in countries where agriculture is a major economic sector.

Changes in the field require the introduction of new inputs, techniques and services. Making them accessible to smallholders, pastoralists, fishermen and foresters, both physically and financially, is a major challenge.

This situation in turn creates opportunities for the development of small local enterprises dedicated to provid- ing inputs and services to farmers.

Changes in farming systems should be accompanied by changes all along food chains. For instance, as pointed out by the HLPE (2012) increasing diversity in the field often requires changes in consumption patterns. In fact, diversification often requires changes along the entire food chain, from input production and distribution to collection, transformation and commercialization of products. For these reasons, diversification is often more easily carried out as a collective project. Several diversified farms can realize the same economies of scale on each of their production systems as a specialized one. This can lead to the creation of services, for example to share machinery and collect and sell their production. 7 FAO, 2012f.