--- Page 534 ---

521 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation • agricultural productivities in the project area over a multiyear period (see GDPRD et al., 2008); • monitoring changes in land use on a wider scale, which can draw on literature such as sustainable land management impact monitoring (Herweg et al., 2012); • resilience to flood and drought disasters over a multiyear period; • total amount of annual GHG emissions reduced from the project areas over a multiyear period; • food security rate by household or by men and women in the project areas over a multiyear period, which is especially important in development countries; and • participation by key stakeholders, both men and women, in agricultural decision making . (Guidance document Annex 6 in the same work as FAO, 2012b provides a more detailed description and exam- ples) Outcome indicators (or ‘intermediary outcome indicators’, depending on the terminology adopted by the donor) are mainly process indicators. In most climate change interventions, there is often a need to develop and es- tablish outcome indicators to track, among other things: • capacity development, including strategy and policy capacity, institutional capacity and technical capacity at different levels (see also Module 17 on capacity development), as well as the individual capacity of men and women (e.g. changes in attitude and behaviour); • infrastructure improvement, including water infrastructure, agriculture infrastructure and rural infra- structure with attention given to who has access to this improved infrastructure; and • technology dissemination, including technologies for climate change adaptation and mitigation in each of the agricultural sectors, and the uptake of technology by men and women.

See also Table 18.5 earlier in the module for examples of indicators of common outputs, outcomes and impacts in monitoring and evaluation for CSA programmes and projects.

Although not an easy task, it is possible to measure variables that are financial in nature, such as income and assets. It is also possible to measure the benefits of climate change mitigation (e.g. GHG emission reduction and increased soil carbon sequestration that can be translated into CO2 eqv.). However, it is more complex to further translate reduced CO2 eqv. emissions into economic values. This can be done using EX-ACT —which is based on some simple assumptions for estimations of CO2 reductions— in combination with various measures used for accessing carbon funds (see Module 14 on financial instruments). Measuring the outcomes for cli- mate change adaptation is more difficult. There is no firm consensus on a set of measurable indicators at the outcome level. Inevitably, benefits can only be measured by more than one variable, which creates a situation where there is a risk of double accounting. In addition, many adaptation benefits, which are not traded as goods and services on markets, can only be valued using techniques from environmental economics.

Of particular importance in the context of climate change is the measurement of changes in vulnerability and resilience. In this regard, there are a number of indicators and indices that have been developed by FAO, the World Food Programme (WFP), non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and others (FAO, 2011; Frankenberg- er et al., 2012). Also, a considerable body of work exists on emergencies and disaster risk reduction and dis- aster risk mitigation. Twigg (2009) identified characteristics of disaster-resilient communities using indicators organized around components of resilience. These indicators are very specific to a particular group and area.

In measuring outcomes, they may include specific household or community capacities to manage key natural resources and for measuring impacts, they may include key food supplies or household assets. For example, a household with savings and assets may be able to access funds in an emergency.

As noted, an important element will always be who decides on, and who benefits from, interventions. For example, household decision making about agricultural practices often has a strong gender dimension, with men and women taking responsibility for different spheres of influence. Sometimes, decisions made by one group affect another group that has had no say in the matter (e.g. men may choose a crop or practice that earns more income for the household, but increases the amount of time women spend weeding or watering).