--- HLPE, 2012a; Thornton ---

5 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries 1.1 Food security and climate change: three intertwined challenges1 Agriculture and food systems must improve and ensure food security, and to do so they need to adapt to climate change and natural resource pressures, and contribute to mitigating climate change. These chal- lenges, being interconnected, have to be addressed simultaneously.

Ensuring food security The world is producing enough food, but in 2010-2012 there were still almost 870 million people estimated to be undernourished, (FAO et al.., 2012). In addition, another billion people are malnourished, lacking es- sential micronutrients. The paradox is that at the same time a large number of people – mainly in richer countries - are over-eating, causing long-term health problems and that 60 percent of the malnourished actually are food producers, smallholders and pastoralists, with 20 percent living in cities and 20 percent landless rural people. For the poor producers, food is not only a basic need, it is the single, and often fragile, support they have for maintaining their livelihood. What is true at the household level is also true at the mac- roeconomic level. There are 32 countries, 20 of them in Africa, facing food crises and in need of international emergency support. In most of these countries, paradoxically, agriculture is an important, if not the major, part of economy.

The objective is to ensure food and nutrition security, worldwide. Ensuring availability of calories and suffi- cient global production is not enough; we also need to make sure that enough food is accessible to everyone, everywhere, physically and economically. In addition, we need to ensure that this food is properly utilized in the right quality and diversity. The goal is to ensure the stability of these three components of food and nutrition security: availability, access and utilization.

Between now and 2050, the world’s population will increase by one-third. Most of the additional 2 billion people will live in developing countries. At the same time, more people will be living in cities (70 percent against the current 50 percent). Urbanization and rising incomes in developing countries are driving in- creases in the consumption of animal products (FAO, 2009a). Given these trends, FAO estimates that produc- tion will have to increase by 60 percent by 2050 to satisfy the expected demands for food and feed (Conforti, 2011). Demand for biofuels, another important factor for the global market, is very dependent on national policies and global demand is expected to grow. According to the OECD-FAO projections, because of increas- ing mandates and consumption incentives, biofuel production is expected to double between 2005 and 2019 (OECD and FAO, 2010).

Impacts of climate change on agriculture Climate change has already significantly impacted agriculture (Lobell et al, 2011) and is expected to further impact directly and indirectly food production. Increase of mean temperature; changes in rain patterns; in- creased variability both in temperature and rain patterns; changes in water availability; the frequency and intensity of ‘extreme events’; sea level rise and salinization; perturbations in ecosystems, all will have pro- found impacts on agriculture, forestry and fisheries (Gornall, 2010; IPCC, 2007a; Beddington, et al,. 2012b; HLPE, 2012a; Thornton et al.., 2012). The extent of these impacts will depend not only on the intensity and timing (periodicity) of the changes but also on their combination, which are more uncertain, and on local conditions. Anticipating appropriately the impacts of climate change on agriculture requires data, tools and models at the spatial scale of actual production areas. Since the last Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report in 2007, some studies have attempted to anticipate these impacts and provide projec- tions at such a scale, enabling us to have a more concrete vision of projected changes. 1 This section draws heavily on Meybeck A. Gitz V. Towards Efficiency & Resilience in Agriculture for Food Security in a Changing Climate presented at the OECD-KREI Expert Meeting on Green Growth and Agriculture and Food in Seoul, Korea 6-8 April 2011