--- Source: FAO, 2012e ---

13
MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Manure management is important both to increase food security and to mitigate climate change as it can be
used as organic fertilizer and is also a source of CH4 and N2O emissions. When manure is used as organic
fertilizer it contributes to the productivity and fertility of the soil by adding organic matter and nutrients,
such as nitrogen, which are trapped by bacteria in the soil. It improves productivity and allows for reduc-
tions in use of synthetic fertilizers and the associated direct and indirect GHG emissions. The increasing
geographic concentration of livestock production means that the manure produced by animals often exceeds
the (nitrogen) absorptive capacity of the local area. Manure becomes a waste product rather than being the
valuable resource in less concentrated, mixed production systems. Proper use of technologies can reduce
direct emissions and also transform manure into a valuable resource and lead to a corresponding reduction
in GHG emissions resulting from the use of synthetic fertilizers.
Integrated systems
Crop systems and livestock systems can also be improved by their better integration. Integrated crop and
livestock systems, at various scales (on-farm and area-wide) increase the efficiency and environmental sus-
tainability of both production methods. When livestock and crops are produced together, the waste of one is
a resource for the other. Manure increases crop production and crop residues and by-products feed animals,
improving their productivity. In these systems, livestock is a strategic element for adaptation. The animals
provide an alternative to cropping in areas becoming marginal for cropping, offer a way to escape poverty and
represent a coping mechanism in vulnerable and variable (in particular weather-related) natural environ-
ments. They also constitute a capital that can be converted to cash when needed.
Box 1.3
Partnership on benchmarking and monitoring the environmental performance of
livestock supply chains
Quantitative information on key environmental impacts along livestock supply chains is required to (a) analyse food
systems and inform decisions at the production and processing levels to improve environmental performance; (b)
develop and evaluate corresponding policy decisions (governmental and non-governmental); and (c) inform relevant
stakeholders.
Valuable work aimed at improving the measurement of environmental performance is being carried out by the
livestock industry, governments, academia and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). However, inconsistencies
in the methods used and the one-off nature of many of the studies do not provide consistent guidance on the required
changes in practices and the potential efficiency gains that can be achieved.
Consultations with stakeholders during 2010 and 2011 confirmed that there was demand for a partnership on
benchmarking and monitoring the environmental performance of the livestock sector. A participative formulation
process led to the identification of key functions and deliverables of the Partnership. It was agreed that representatives
of private sector, NGOs, governments, science and international standard organizations should be involved.
The Partnership’s objective is to improve environmental performance of the livestock sector, while considering its
economic and social viability. This will be achieved through support to decision-making and by providing guidance
on performance assessments (metrics and methods) and their use. The partnership was officially launched in July
2012. An important aspect of the work is to assess both negative and positive contributions (e.g. improved carbon
sequestration in soils, soil organic matter, water retention and quality, and biodiversity) Activities are structured
along four components:
• Component 1 - Sector-specific guidelines and methods for the life cycle assessment of GHG emissions from
livestock food chains;
• Component 2 - Global database of GHG emissions related to feed crops;
• Component 3 - Measures of non-GHG environmental performance of livestock food chains; and
• Component 4 - Communication strategy.

Source: FAO, 2012e