--- Page 536 ---

523 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation technology adoption, land use change, household livelihoods and institutional change) that have been dealt with extensively in development literature and through a range of methods and good practices (see Annex 18.1 and Additional Resources). Evaluation requires rigorous sampling and survey methodology with both qualita- tive and quantitative data and analysis. Monitoring needs to have in-built and integrated systems for tracking financial transactions, as well as expected outputs, activity targets and achievements. Monitoring also needs to incorporate feedback and learning into programme and project management. To track and manage data, many of these monitoring systems increasingly incorporate computerized management information systems.

A critical element of successful monitoring and evaluation is the internalization of its importance in planning and decision making by management and other stakeholders in the CSA intervention process. Monitoring and evaluation tasks are too often merely seen as reporting for governments or donors.

A particular methodological issue noted earlier was the importance of attribution. This is the particular chal- lenge faced when attempting to ascribe observed change and results specifically to a project while it could also be due to other external changes and interventions taking place. This is a very big concern for climate change programmes since they are potentially affected by long term and large scale climate and economic processes; hence this is specifically discussed further in section 18.5. Here in the context of projects the issue is dealt with through the design of rigorous project baselines and impact evaluation surveys, which take into account exter- nal effects (see Annex 18.1). They do so principally by including ‘control’ areas and households in the survey samples, against which changes in project beneficiaries’ livelihoods and land use can be compared. 18.5 Challenges and guiding principles There are numerous challenges and principles that need to be taken account of in assessment, monitoring and evaluation for agricultural development projects and programmes. This CSA sourcebook module does not discuss those general issues. Interested readers are referred to, for example, IFAD, 2002; World Bank, 2005; World Bank, 2006 and FAO, 2010b. CSA poses unique challenges for assessments, monitoring and evaluation; a set of guiding principles can be suggested to tackle them. The following discussions are intended to highlight specific problems that are particular to CSA. No concrete approaches to assessment, monitoring and evalua- tion are prescribed in this module, as each CSA project/programme is context specific. Instead a CSA designer is encouraged to be aware of the challenges and to follow the principles laid out in this section. Most of the challenges and principles are common to assessments for policy and project design as well as monitoring and evaluation.

Definitions and goals “Climate-smart agriculture” is an evolving concept and there is not yet a single definition for it that is agreed by the international community (see also Module 1). CSA means different things to different countries, depending for example on the level of agricultural development. In some cases, more focus is placed on mitigation, while in others the focus is mainly on increasing productivity and enhancing resilience. Likewise, there are differing views on how to define “adaptation” to climate change, or what constitutes “successful adaptation” to climate change. The lack of consensus indicates a lack of agreed metrics to determine effectiveness of activities to achieve CSA/adaptation, which means extra challenges to monitoring and evaluation (Hedger et al., 2008; UN- FCCC, 2010a; Villanueva, 2010; GIZ, 2011a). Thereby, one of the first steps for successful CSA and its monitor- ing and evaluation is to define CSA goals with the wide participation of different stakeholders, and to develop a common understanding of what CSA’s elements are.

Multi-sectoral issues and engaging stakeholders Climate change objectives link together various sectors and stakeholders, and as an evolving concept CSA requires continuing even further dialogue and engagement of key players. A typical agricultural development project can have wide relevance from public health to migration in the context of climate change. CSA will not be successful unless relevant stakeholders are engaged at all levels and across all relevant sectors (UNFCCC, 2010a; Hedger et al., 2008; Villanueva, 2010; GIZ, 2011a). The stakeholders to be consulted vary from the com-