--- Source: adapted from O’Brien ---

501 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation • Changes in farm household income as a result of climate variability and change; • Number of households in areas at risk of rising sea levels and sea water intrusion; • Accessibility to local markets due to climatic factors; • Volatility of commodity market price due to climate variability; and • Characterization of households or groups particularly vulnerable to climate change (e.g. income sources, crops grown, education level, male- or female-headed households, access to information, access to financial resources). *Note: The climate impacts on agriculture are based on historical, present, and future projections under cli- mate change At this point it is useful to define some key concepts in climate impact assessments. ‘Impact’ refers to the ef- fects of climate change on natural and anthropogenic systems. In the case of CSA, the impact will be felt in a variety of areas, including: landscapes, ecosystems, watersheds, infrastructure, farms, agricultural produc- tion and markets. The assessment of impacts considers exposure to climate effects and sensitivity to such exposure. It is done in monetary and/or non-monetary terms. ‘Vulnerability’ is frequently defined as a function of potential impacts (exposure and sensitivity to exposure) and adaptive capacity (Carter et al., 2007; see also Module 1). Exposure is the extent to which the system is physi- cally harmed by climate change. Sensitivity is how affected a system is after the exposure. Adaptive capacity is the system’s ability to avoid potential damages, take advantage of opportunities, and cope with the conse- quences of damages. Assessments of impact and vulnerability (sometimes termed as outcome vulnerability) defined in this way usually adopt a top-down approach (Figure 18.2). See also Module 15 as the terms also often appear in disaster risk reduction.

Figure 18.2 Outcome vulnerability Climate change Exposure unit Sensitivity Potential impact Adaptive capacity Outcome vulnerability Source: adapted from O’Brien et al., 2007 The top-down approach starts from global climate information and moves down the spatial scale to regional, national and subnational levels for local projections and impact analyses. Local impacts of climate change on sectors affected by CSA and vulnerability of these sectors to these impacts are derived using a sequence of different methods and tools across various levels. Uncertainties in the analyses may be inflated as they are propagated through this sequence.