--- Indicators should, wherever possible, be Simple, Measurable, Attributable, Reliable  and Time bound ---

519
MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation
Developing indicators
To measure project progress and achievements, it is necessary to identify suitable indicators and clarify
related baselines, targets and means of verification for each of the results at different levels. This forms the
core part of the project’s monitoring and evaluation framework. Indicators are extensively treated in moni-
toring and evaluation guides. Highlighted below are some key aspects of indicators in relation to climate
change (See also Brooks et al., 2011 and 2013).
Characteristics of indicators
Indicators should, wherever possible, be Simple, Measurable, Attributable, Reliable  and Time bound
(SMART). The somewhat expanded set of SMART criteria presented below provides a useful guide for iden-
tifying appropriate indicators (modified from CIDA, cited in GIZ, 2011a):
Box 18.6
The GreenChoice monitoring and evaluation framework
Conservation South Africa has a monitoring and evaluation tool that farmers in commercial and small-scale sectors
under the GreenChoice platform use on their farms to input information on the best practices the y are implementing
based on the Farmer Field Book and Reference for Well- managed Farms. The Well-managed Farm Guide is used
as a tool for developing sector-specific guidelines for best practices, such as potato industry guidelines, mohair best
practice guidelines and biodiversity conservation. The field book is then used to track the implementation of the
guidelines. Specific indicators used for monitoring and evaluation that are relevant to CSA are:
• yield relative to inputs (improvement in kilograms);
• the number of farmers and farm workers whose livelihoods are improved;
• land use efficiency (reduction in land use in hectares);
• biodiversity protected (increase in hectares);
• alien plant removal (number of hectares where alien species are removed to five percent density);
• soil health, soil organic matter and nutrient balance (improvement in hectares);
• water quality (improvements in kilotonnes);
• toxic chemical use (reduction in kilograms); and
• GHG footprint (reduction of atmospheric GHG emissions in tonnes).

More information can be found at Conservation South Africa, 2013
Box 18.7
PepsiCo UK and Ireland: 50 in 5
To increase its productivity in a sustainable manner, PepsiCo has increased its focus on sustainable agriculture.
PepsiCo is aiming to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions and the amount of water it uses by 50 percent in 5 years
(50 in 5).
PepsiCo, in partnership with Cambridge University and the University of Aberdeen, has developed farming innovations
such as i-crop and the Cool Farm Tool to meet this target. I-crop is a web-based crop management system that
allows producers to monitor and manage their agricultural crops for maximum yield and quality. The system enables
growers to track crop inputs and outputs and allows them to accurately calculate water use and CO2 emissions.
With the Cool Farm Tool, a carbon calculator, PepsiCo has measured the carbon footprint of different products and
has analysed ways of reducing its impact upon the climate. In 2007, PepsiCo discovered, while working with the
Carbon Trust, that 34 percent of its CO2 emissions was generated during the production stage of agricultural crops,
such as potatoes, oats and apples. PepsiCo, in close cooperation with farmers in the United Kingdom and with the
support of the Cool Farm Tool, started reducing CO2 emissions and decreasing water use.
For more information see PepsiCo, 2012