--- Page 358 ---

345 MODULE 12: Local institutions 1) General overview 2) Institutional interests/ mandate 3) Institutional strengths 4) Institutional weaknesses 5) Scope for synergies Sector/Type of institution Name of institution Local branch of national farmers’ union _ Support and profit for constituents Political representation Detailed knowledge of local farming conditions Access to established farming community Male-oriented (majority of constituents are male) Low capacity; not powerful enough to influence agricultural policy at national level Can provide valuable technical knowledge and extension.

Can be a forum for dialogue about women’s inclusion in farming within the traditional farming community.

Can provide insights on market conditions and private sector partners.

International retailer _ Profit Positive public perception Market access Funds available Little experience working with smallholders Output rather than outcome/process oriented Can provide a market for the emerging women smallholder farmers while augmenting public standing by engaging in socially and environmentally sustainable production.

National farmers’ cooperation and national/ international NGOs can act as interface with smallholders for the retailer. 12.5. Conclusions This module has outlined the major kinds of institutions that can advance CSA and has described their most salient characteristics and roles. The case studies provided indicate how different institutions in distinct con- texts can provide key support to CSA initiatives. This support includes: producing and sharing technical knowl- edge; providing financial services and access to markets; and brokering or fostering collective action between stakeholders and initiatives. The Quick Institutional Context Assessment provides a simple methodology to as- sist project planners and implementers in identifying helpful institutional partners for their own CSA projects.

It highlights areas requiring particular attention in order to create a enabling environment for the project in hand. References to more detailed mapping, planning and capacity assessment metodologies methodologies are made throughout the chapter and are provided in the reference list.

Understanding the institutional context within which a CSA initiative is implemented is crucial to the project’s success. Institutional endorsement is vital, as it is often pivotal in motivating individuals to support projects.

Institutional opposition or apathy is highly obstructive. If smallholder producers are to adopt climate-smart