--- Bank, 2011; FAO, 2012a). ---

304 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Collective marketing as a way to get access to markets Collective marketing can encourage market access and take different forms, such as through the creation of a marketing cooperative, which can help to provide smallholder farmers, livestock holders and fishers a place where produce can be prepared and packed to be transported to markets and other distribution centres.

However, there have been mixed results and challenges related to these organizations, for example the impor- tance of having good access to transport, a favourable market, marketable products, as well as the need for accountability and transparency among its members. There are different ways to increase accountability and transparency, such as through the establishment of a well-functioning record system that is shared among the members, a dispute system and regular meetings to enhance the exchange of information (ODI, 2005; World Bank, 2011; FAO, 2012a).

Inadequate market facilities In addition, food is lost as a result of inadequate market facilities, such as lack of storage and cooling facilities, unsanitary and unhygienic practices, lack of or inadequate proper garbage disposal, clogged sewage vents and so on. Improvement of facilities should be supported by appropriate government actions so as to reduce the inefficiency generated by institutional and physical infrastructure facilities (Barrett and Mutambatsere, 2005; FAO, 2011b).

Increasing efficiencies related to access to infrastructure and infrastructural facilities is not easy to overcome.

However, addressing these issues can have significant effects on increasing people’s physical and economic access to food.

Packaging Depending on the value chain of a product, a product can be packaged and repackaged at various stages of the food chain. Packaging helps to distribute and transport the product from farm to storage, cooling and pro- cessing facilities, to wholesalers, retailers and consumers. Besides that, it should provide protection against physical and chemical damage during distribution, transport and marketing; it should also provide protection against insects, rodents, and other contaminants from entering the food. As a result, packaging practices and technologies can ensure quality and safety of food so that quantitative and qualitative post-harvest losses can be significantly reduced (FAO, 2010b).

However, the type of packaging material used depends on the availability of local materials, which may be highly limited. In addition, these materials should also be affordable as packaging can represent a substantial part of the costs for producers (both in developing and developed countries). Paper, fiberboard, plastic, glass, steel and aluminum are among some of the packaging material that are commonly used. The choice of the packaging material used is made based on a number of trade-offs between various factors, including econom- ic costs, protecting goods, public health and the environment, providing presentation, branding, information about the goods and what consumers need (smaller portions for those who live alone) and the likely product wastage. In addition, there are also environmental impacts associated with the type of packaging being used, e.g. the thinner the packaging material, the less landfill space it will take up, some materials are recyclable (like paper, plastic, glass etc.) and some are not (like the foil-backed wrap).

Knowing the exact causes and the stages of when losses occur within the food chain helps to identify possible packaging interventions. An overview of various packaging options is shown in Table 11.2.