--- Source: IFAD, 2001 ---

303 MODULE 11: Developing sustainable and inclusive food value chains for Climate-smart agriculture ©FAO/Riccardo Gangale Harvested cassava is transported by cart, Central African Republic ©FAO/Giampiero Diana Milk is being transported by rickshaws from the countryside to the milk processing plant, Bangladesh Market access, lack of markets and inadequate market facilities Access to markets is essential for producers, in particular smallholder producers, in order to generate in- come, strengthen food security and contribute to sustainable livelihoods. Improving access to international and domestic markets helps them to sell more produce. With the income that they earn, they may be able to invest in their own businesses and increase their production as well as improve the quality of their produce and/or diversify their production, which contributes to building their resilience. However, besides access to markets, roads, and affordable transportation, access to market information is also crucial.

Food is lost due to several market related issues. Firstly, some farmers, in particular those in developing countries, lack or have insufficient access to markets, due to high transport costs, as a result of remoteness from markets. Therefore, those who live closer to markets or better roads are able to engage more with the market and thus have a higher chance to generate additional income. Besides these physical barriers to ac- cess markets, they may also face limitations due to the lack of market information, business and negotiating experience, etc. (see Table 11.1) (FAO, 2005; FAO, 2011b).

Table 11.1 Market access constraints: physical, structural, information and organization Constraint Disadvantaged areas Physical Poor roads, high transport costs, perishable goods, low value/weight produce.

Structural Asymmetry of market relations: reliance on monopsonistic traders, agro-processors or marketing boards whose market power allows excess profit shares.

Skills, information and organization Lack of understanding of how markets operate, lack of information, lack of relevant skills.

Source: IFAD, 2001 Lack of markets Another challenge related to markets is that food gets lost because of the lack of markets. At certain times there is an oversupply of some crops, such as the seasonal production of many perishable food crops, which means that there is a temporary oversupply of these crops on the markets. One of the ways to reduce food losses and to add value to the produce is to process and preserve these foods so that the waste of food is mini- mized and the loss of income is reduced (FAO, 1998; FAO, 2011b).