--- The CGIAR research programme on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food ---

508 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 18.3 How to conduct assessments for CSA policy and project design Designing assessments To draw useful information for planning CSA actions, a literature review is recommended. In this way, already available information can be gathered about the country and local areas. A literature review identifies gaps, and a customized assessment complements the literature review by collecting and analysing additional data.

Abundant information on climate change and its impact on agriculture are available at global and regional scales. Information at national and subnational scales is more scarce but can be found from a range of sourc- es, including: the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Reports; the IPCC Special Report on Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (IPCC, 2012); National Communications to the UNFCCC; UNFCCC National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs); national climate change strategy and action plans; academic papers; non peer-reviewed reports; national ministries; climate change bodies; and research institutions and universities.

Assessments of impacts and mitigation potential, particularly those done by academic scientists and econo- mists, often do not have the user’s perspective in mind. In designing assessments, the information needs of CSA practitioners should to be clearly defined at the outset.

Box 18.2 The CGIAR research programme on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security baseline The Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) baseline is being implemented on three different levels: household, village and organization. It collects indicators that describe current practices and behaviours in relation to livelihood systems and farming practices in CCAFS sites over time. These indicators also indicate changes made to agriculture and natural resources management strategies in the recent past. Other indicators help CCAFS to understand the enabling environment that allows for these practices and behaviours (e.g. natural resource conditions, policies, institutions) and the agricultural and climatic information that organizations that work at each site receive. The objective is to capture diversity across communities and households with sufficient precision to capture changes that occur over time.

The key aim of the CCAFS baseline is to provide snapshots of current behaviour at the sites using instruments that can be applied in all the CCAFS regions. The plan is to revisit the same households and communities after five years, and again in ten years, to monitor the changes that have occurred since the baseline was carried out. The same survey is being conducted in diverse locations across all CCAFS target regions. To date, close to 4 500 households have been surveyed in over 220 villages. In 16 CCAFS sites, 16 communities participated in qualitative focus group discussions, and over 160 organizations have been interviewed at these sites. This has allowed for valid and robust cross-site and cross-regional comparisons. As a result, the baselines are broad rather than deep. The intention is that complex relationships will be explored through further research in the same locations with secondary data.

The emphasis on carrying out cross-site comparisons has two costs. First, the baselines include information on the site’s characteristics, but they are typically not sufficiently detailed for some activities (e.g. farming systems studies). Second, the baselines do not contain all the information needed to do ex-post impact assessment studies.

Such studies are usually designed to evaluate specific technological or policy changes in a location and attribute the changes to particular activities carried out by specific agents. The CCAFS baseline meets the first objective of impact assessment (tracking change over time), but does not allow for the attribution of these changes to specific activities.

The goal is not to attribute these changes to the programme, but to assess what kinds of changes have occurred and whether these changes are helping households adapt to, and mitigate, climate change.

All CCAFS baseline guidelines and tools for data collection, processing and analysis, as well as the data itself and the reports are being made publicly available.

For more information about CCAFS: CCAFS and CGIAR, 2013