--- Source: FAO, 2008b ---

428 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Desert Development Programme initiated in 1977-78; and the Watershed Programme, which is seen as a key vehicle for drought proofing in rainfed areas. The country has introduced specific schemes, such as the 1985 Comprehensive Crop Insurance Scheme to “provide a measure of financial support to farmers in the event of crop failure due to droughts, floods, etc.” (Venkateswarlu, 2010; Republic of India Ministry of Agri- culture, 2009).

There are an extensive number of technologies and practices for reducing the vulnerability of farming systems and building their resilience. Some examples include: crop diversification, crop insurance schemes, drought or flood-tolerant crop varieties, hazard-proof grain storage facilities and livestock shelters, strategic fodder Box 15.5 Local practices in hazard risk management in Jamaica In Jamaica, communities that are affected each year by hurricanes, floods and landslides, utilize a variety of trees as a water velocity reduction strategy to enhance slope stability and reduce landslide susceptibility. Reduced runoff also helps to diminish or mitigate inundation in the lower lands. Trees that are used include: bamboo, coconuts, grass, growstick, hibiscus, sugar cane, pineapple and other fruit trees.

To regulate soil moisture, farmers utilize larger trees with high moisture absorption capacity. They plant them in waterlogged areas of farms to reduce the probability of flooding.

Figure 15.7 Use of biodiversity to mitigate hazard impact on a flood and landslide susceptible house plot Water tolerant crops such as dasheen are planted in waterlogged areas to reduce water velocity and thereby prevent damage to more valuable crops. Along the edges of drains and other waterways, water-tolerant crops serve to stabilize banks and prevent the spread of floodwater. Governor grass (Vetiveria zizanoides) is planted along the riverbank to reduce the potential loss of land, crops and homes during flooding.

Source: FAO, 2008b