--- case studies are Argentina, India, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Mongolia, Somalia and South Africa. Some of the initiatives ---

179 MODULE 6: Conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture The report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) indicates that agriculture contributes about 47 percent and 58 percent of total anthropogenic emissions of methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O), respectively. However, there is a range of uncertainty in the estimates. The main sources of non-CO2 emis- sions from agriculture are CH4 from enteric fermentation (38 percent) and N2O emissions from soils (32 per- cent) (IPCC, 2007). Globally, cattle are the major source for enteric CH4 emissions. Dietary manipulation and improved feeding systems can reduce CH4 emissions and nitrogenous emissions and contribute to climate change mitigation. A better understanding of the micro-organisms involved in the digestive processes in the rumen will provide a basis for interventions that improve the efficiency of digestion and reduce the amount of pollutants produced by ruminant livestock (McSweeney and Mackie, 2012) (see also Module 8 on livestock).

Using and conserving genetic resources for food and agriculture In agricultural systems, breeds and varieties of livestock and crops that are abandoned by farmers or pasto- ralists (i.e. are no longer used for production) often face the risk of extinction. The abandonment of particular genetic resources can be caused by increasing availability and popularity of alternative varieties or breeds (usually those developed through intensive breeding programmes), changes in consumer demand and chang- ing agricultural practices and production systems.

When the survival of breeds or varieties is threatened because they are falling out of use, efforts should be made, where feasible, to promote alternative uses for them. In this regard, there are opportunities, particularly in developed countries, to develop niche markets for specialized products (see Box 6.2) and to use grazing ani- mals in the management of landscapes and wildlife habitats.

The use of genetically diverse varieties and breeds should be promoted as it improves the resilience of agro- ecosystems, preserves future breeding options and helps to reduce genetic erosion. Broadening the accessible genetic resource base enables more effective management of genetic resources for food and agriculture. For example, a wide range of accessible plant genetic diversity allows farmers to change crops, varieties and farm- ing systems to meet changing climate conditions (Asfaw and Lipper, 2011).

A number of traditional production systems increase the diversity of genetic resources and employ specific techniques for ensuring their optimal use. These systems can influence the agro-ecosystem in such a way that it becomes more able to cope with some of the expected secondary effects of climate change. Rice-fish agricultural systems, which co-evolved with wet rice cultivation in China about 2 000 years ago, are an example (see Box 6.3). These systems are sustainable and can provide a valuable source of protein, especially for sub- sistence farmers practising rainfed agriculture.

Box 6.2 Marketing to promote locally adapted breeds and improve livelihoods Throughout the world and over centuries, small-scale livestock keepers and pastoralists have developed animal breeds that are well-suited to local conditions. Hardy and disease-resistant, many of these breeds can survive on little water and scant vegetation. They can continue producing meat and milk in areas where modern, imported breeds cannot survive without expensive housing, feed and veterinary care. Traditional breeds allow people in inhospitable areas to earn a living and maintain valuable traits for future breeding efforts. However, these breeds are often in danger of disappearing, pushed out by modern production techniques and more competitive exotic breeds.

Finding niche markets for these products is one way of ensuring the survival of these breeds and enabling the people who keep them to earn more.

FAO has compiled eight cases from Africa, Asia and Latin America where outside interventions have attempted to develop markets for specialty products from locally adapted breeds. The products include wool, cashmere, meat, hides, milk and dairy products, from dromedaries, Bactrian camels, sheep and goats. The countries included in the case studies are Argentina, India, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Mongolia, Somalia and South Africa. Some of the initiatives targeted urban markets within the country; others were aimed at export markets.

Source: FAO, 2010a