--- Environment and Development Action in the Third World, the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa and ---

484 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Improving access to climate and agricultural information using ICTs and ComDev Bridging the current information and knowledge gap for more inclusive and effective decision-making within CSA is a key challenge. Smallholders are usually based in rural areas far from the traditional providers of agricultural information and advisory services. Successful adaptation to climate change by small producers is not merely a question of developing new adaptation technologies, but depends on ensuring access to them.

ICTs such as radio, television, video, internet, and media and mobile services can play a pivotal role in facilitating the assessment of expected future impacts of climate change on agricultural production systems and landscapes (e-Agriculture). ICTs are powerful tools to improve farmers’ access to timely climate and agricultural information.

Knowledge and advice facilitate the exchange of experiences among peers and between farmers and various stake- holders while helping to empower local stakeholder groups through increased participation in decision-making processes (Kalas and Finlay, 2009). The information provided through ICTs varies substantially, ranging from tech- nical advice on specific CSA practices or early warning and disaster information on price and market information.

The following two boxes (Box 17.7 and 17.8) illustrate how the use of ICTs can improve access to research infor- mation for researchers, development practitioners and extension workers in the context of CSA.

ICTs are also frequently used to support regional, national or sub-regional knowledge networks and enable knowledge exchange between different stakeholders across geographic boundaries. For example, Africa- Adapt is a regional, bilingual knowledge network for climate change adaptation in Africa hosted by the NGO Environment and Development Action in the Third World, the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development Climate Prediction and Applications Centre, and funded by Box 17.7 Advances in ICTs increase the utility of African sites for testing crop varieties Context The widespread use of higher-yielding and stress-resistant crop varieties throughout Africa has been frustrated by the variability of African growing conditions and the difficulty of selecting appropriate sites and growing environments to test new cultivars. Innovations may be tested, but they are often not tested in ways that make it more likely that they will be useful to farmers, meaning they are not adopted.

Methodology To address this situation, the Africa Trial Sites portal enables national and international research organizations to pool their extensive information on trial sites electronically and provides numerous tools (based on ICT advances in bioinformatics, Geographic Information Systems [GIS], and data management) to help farmers, plant breeders, and agronomists evaluate new varieties more efficiently in the field. For some time, much of the data from field trials— representing an enormous investment of research resources over several decades—resided on the shelves of research institutions and was difficult to assemble, analyze on a large scale, and put to use. Now, users can search the portal to access data on trial sites by country, design trials to evaluate cultivars, obtain tools to manage trials (from developing a budget to estimating water stress during the growing season), analyze trial data, view results of spatial analyses, examine data on an interactive Google map, and report results online. They can also rank crop varieties and add comments about their performance at a given site. The website allows the analysis of climate data for any point in Africa as well as climate similarity comparisons between trial sites and other African areas. Finally, the portal includes links to useful resources, such as the websites of participating centres, from whose breeders and gene bank curators anyone can request seed supplies. The combination of African trial site data and interactive data analysis tools has made valuable information widely available to the agricultural research, development and extension community.

Outcomes As results for cultivars tested in Africa have not been readily available online until now, participants’ data is significantly expanding common knowledge of which particular cultivars are suited to which environments (especially those environments subject to stress from disease, pests, or environmental factors, including climate change). International agricultural research centres are beginning to use the portal to standardize their trial site information for a climate research program, drawing in national partners, and they are using Africats.org to standardize their trial site information.

Source: World Bank, 2012