--- Page 320 ---

307 MODULE 11: Developing sustainable and inclusive food value chains for Climate-smart agriculture Food consumption stage In developing countries, the amount of food wasted at consumer level is minimal. Poverty, limited income and smaller amounts being purchased are contributing factors to reduced levels of food being wasted. In developed countries, however, food is wasted by consumers. This is not only as a result of consumers buying more than what they can actually consume and inappropriate capacity to correctly interpret date marking, but also due to consumer behaviour and food choices that are made (Stuart, 2009; European Commission, 2010; FAO, 2011b).

Ultimately it is the consumer that decides whether he or she wants to waste food. The consumer may not be driven by economic factors to reduce waste. However, it is still throwing away money, food and the inputs that were used to produce food. Consumer behaviour can be influenced through various means including, for ex- ample, educational awareness-raising campaigns, labelling schemes, as well as government-led promotion of making sustainable and healthy food choices through taxation and provision of subsidies.

Consumer interventions to improve efficiency of food systems Consumers can be agents of change with regards to sustainable consumption and adopting sustainable diets (Spaargaren and Oosterveer, 2010; Lorek and Fuchs, 2011). They can influence the whole food chain to a cer- tain degree by making sustainable dietary choices, which will influence what, where and how producers pro- duce and who produces. In addition, consumer behaviour also contributes to how much food is consumed and wasted. This is due to the duration that food is kept before it is consumed, and how food is stored, prepared and cooked, amongst other things. Therefore, possible interventions related to addressing consumer behaviour include improved planning, in-home food storage, preparation and cooking techniques. Not only the food itself is lost, but also the amount of land, water and energy used to produce the product is wasted.

Raising consumers’ awareness In order for consumers to make food choices and change their behaviour, awareness needs to be raised through provision of information and education. Consumers need to be educated on where their food comes from, how it was produced, how many and which resources were used and what is the impact on the environment, so that they are able to make informed choices that are both nutritious and sustainable. Governments should support educational awareness campaigns (Boer et al., 2007; Tukker et al., 2007).

Labelling schemes Labelling schemes are needed to guide consumers to make informed choices (Giraud, 2003; Davies, 2011).

The food industry and agribusinesses have a responsibility to provide labels that are clear and easy to read and understand so that people can make informed choices. Information that consumers would like to know can be related to production methods, application of pesticides, the distance that food travelled (‘food miles’) and the carbon footprint. According to a study undertaken by Which? (2010), labels and terms should be used consistently on different products and brands so that confusion is avoided. The study concluded that labelling schemes have a wider outreach if they are connected to government campaigns, supported by validated sci- entific data, and used to provide interpreted data so that consumers are able to make sustainable food choices (Davies, 2011; Wognum et al., 2011).

There are still certain challenges regarding the development of such labelling schemes, as these schemes are often competing with one another. Different ways to increase transparency include integrated information systems, such as certification and branding (Eden et al., 2008). But as was highlighted earlier, these brands and certification need to be clear and easy for people to understand in order for them to make healthy and sustainable food choices.

Socio-cultural factors influencing consumers’ behaviour and food choices Educating people and providing them with information is not sufficient. This is due to the fact that consumers’ attitudes and food choices are formed through their values and beliefs, but also habits, income and knowledge.

Not only personal characteristics play a role, but also social and cultural norms need to be taken into account (Boer et al., 2007; Eden et al., 2008; Davies, 2011). According to Tukker et al. (2007) the behaviour of consumers