--- Page 277 ---

264 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Building resilience By targeting specific areas of vulnerability, the resilience of households, communities and nations can be increased. However, if these areas of vulnerability are addressed only selectively or partially, remaining vul- nerabilities may jeopardize or even negate any positive effects. Moreover, in many areas, unresolved issues outside the fisheries and aquaculture sector may limit the potential for building resilience. In this regard, there are several key principles on which to base analysis and action, including: • Systems with more diversity tend to have greater resilience. • Initiatives to build resilience can connect across scales. Actions to build resilience at the local-level can reinforce each other to create greater resilience on a broader scale. National resilience, which can be improved, for example, through market and economic strategies, can create a more positive environment for building local resilience. • Perspectives for resilience need to acknowledge all the elements in the impact pathway for development.

Where possible, tradeoffs between the risk to resilience and costs of building resilience should be identified. • Climate change-induced drivers can be important, but they may not be the only factors that need to be ad- dressed. In some circumstances, they may be relatively insignificant.

Theme 3: Reducing and removing GHGs As for the terrestrial food systems, fisheries and aquaculture GHG emissions, mainly carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O), are associated with various aspects of production and distribution; while management of the aquatic ecosystem itself has important potential for reducing net GHG flux to the atmosphere through the natural sequestration of carbon. There are also possible options for aquatic biofuel production, which could be linked with the fisheries and aquaculture sector. In addition, there may be interac- tions with GHG mitigation efforts in the energy sector in areas such as hydropower and coastal and offshore renewable energy generation. Three areas of interaction can be articulated: the sector’s own contribution to GHGs and the potential for reducing these emissions; the sector’s potential role in supporting the natural sys- tem’s removal of emissions; and the sector’s role in providing alternative energy sources.

The role of the sector in reducing its emissions Although there are still substantial areas that need to be addressed, information on GHG emissions and their potential reductions from aquatic food production and distribution systems is becoming more clearly un- derstood (Poseidon, 2011; Muir, 2012). For capture fisheries emissions are primarily related to fuel use. The nature and levels of emissions depend not only on technical aspects, such as types of vessels and gear used (e.g. active/passive gear, trawl, dredge, seine, gillnet, longline, light-attraction fishing, traps) (Muir, 2013) but also on driving market forces and management of fishing capacity – too many vessels chasing after fewer and fewer fish tends to increase fuel use. Emissions of particulate ‘black’ carbon could add significantly to current estimates, but this issue needs further investigation. For aquaculture, feed is considered to be the primary determining factor for emission levels and fertilizers are a secondary factor. Therefore, GHG emissions tend to increase as an aquaculture system moves from being extensive (untreated or partially fertilised), to semi- intensive (fertilised and/or partially fed) to intensive (completely fed and fertilized). Fuel and energy use for water exchange and treatment, service vessels and vehicles, and husbandry equipment also add to CO2 emis- sions, but is usually much less significant. The relatively undetermined effects of CH4 in sediments and N2O in sediments and the water column are also potentially important and need to be further defined.

Processing fish and aquatic animals ranges from simple artisanal drying and smoking to highly controlled sea- food preparation using high-specification packaging and labelling. In this regard, energy use is the primary de- termining factor for GHG output. There are wide variations in emissions depending on local practices, input varia- tions (species, sourcing, quantity and quality) and operating efficiency. Water used in food processing and its links to GHG emissions may also be important. As the most widely traded global food product, aquatic foods may travel considerable distances in a range of forms and in various states of perishability. In this regard, GHG outputs are usually directly related to fuel use and to energy use in handling and cold and freezer storage. The specific choice of refrigerants is also important. Leakage from old or poorly maintained equipment can be critical, as many low