--- CSA projects in Kenya and Tanzania. ---

476 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Anchoring programmes to local or national institutions and systems In order to anchor CSA in national institutions it is crucial to support national actors in internalizing changes, such as by: • facilitating the adoption of new or revised CSA related policies and providing for their implementation as a national priority; • supporting the incorporation of CSA related knowledge into national curricula; • implementing new procedures in the functioning of institutions; and/or • encouraging internal changes that prepare staff to utilize new competencies in daily tasks.

Tracking CD CD is fundamentally about change. Monitoring the effects of capacity-related interventions is crucial, although the complex and non-linear nature of the CD process makes it difficult to attribute impacts to particular ac- tivities. Nevertheless, good CD practice recommends that capacity-related indicators should be an integral part of any programmatic results framework. This includes assessing capacities and political commitment at country-level (FAO, 2013 forthcoming) and establishing a simple and sound monitoring and evaluation system that can help fill in knowledge gaps and demonstrate which approaches work best so that CSA pilot actions can be effectively scaled up (see Module 18 on M&E).

Assessing Capacities To ensure quality at entry with successful capacity development from the outset, capacity assessments are critical. A capacity assessment can help determine what and whose capacities need to be developed but also provide a benchmark to measure progress and identify what the adoption constraints are and to ensure that the envisioned CD-related interventions for the CSA project address some of these.

An assessment compares the existing capacities across the three dimensions of the capacity system (individual, organizational and enabling environment) with those needed to reach future development results. It is guided by the following key questions: Where are we now? Where do we want to go? What is the best way to get there?

Below, Box 17.1 illustrates the application of the FAO capacity assessment methodology when tailored to CSA projects in Kenya and Tanzania.