--- Page 97 ---

84 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 3.1 Introduction It is commonly acknowledged that most of the impacts from climate change will relate to water (UN-Water, 2010). How water is managed will be at the centre of climate change adaptation strategies. This is particularly true in rural areas and in the agriculture sector, where water plays a critical role in crop and animal production (including fish), and the management of ecosystems, including forests, rangeland and cropland. There is also scope for climate change mitigation actions in water management for agriculture.

The most immediate impact of climate change on water for agriculture will be through the increased variability of rainfall, higher temperatures, and associated extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods. In the medium to long term, climate change will affect water resources and reduce the availability or reliability of water supplies in many places already subject to water scarcity. This impact must be considered in the bigger picture of water scarcity and agricultural development in which other factors are driving changes in water use at a much faster pace than climate change. Climate change is expected to bring additional burdens on already stressed systems.

Addressing risks associated with climate change requires an understanding of the potential water-related impacts of climate change and the vulnerability of rural populations. Vulnerability, sensitivity, adaptability, resilience and exposure vary depending on the agricultural system and the importance of agriculture for the national economy. These two factors are reviewed below as a basis for action.

There is a range of possible response options to adapt to climate change. These options can be related to policies, investments, water management, and institutional and technical factors, both within the water and agriculture sectors and beyond. To have optimal impact, these options must be used in combinations that are tailored to different contexts. Focus should be placed on major systems at risk. However, there is also a need to assess the vulnerability of different categories of rural people to identify priority actions. 3.2 Water management in agriculture: status and trends Although agriculture is highly dependent on climate, so far evidence of observed changes related to regional climate changes, and specifically to water, has been difficult to find. One of the reasons for this is that agri- culture is strongly influenced by factors unrelated to climate, especially management practices, technological advances, market prices and agricultural policies. These factors have more immediate impacts on water than those induced by climate change (Bates et al., 2008). For this reason, it is important to understand the current status of water management in agriculture before assessing the potential impact of climate change.

Over the last 50 years, heightened demand for food, fibers and other agricultural products has been met most- ly by an increase in agricultural productivity. The expansion of agricultural land has remained relatively limited.

Total cultivated land increased by only 12 percent between 1961 and 2009, but productivity more than doubled.

The amount of land needed to produce food for one person has decreased from 0.45 hectares in 1961 to 0.22 hectares in 2009. During the same period, the extent of irrigated land has more than doubled, increasing from 139 to 301 million hectares (FAO, 2011a). By providing farmers with access to water, irrigation has been a key factor in agricultural intensification. The expansion of irrigated land is expected to continue in the future as farmers will increasingly look for greater control over production factors.

With the doubling of irrigated area, water withdrawal for agriculture has been rising sharply. Globally, ag- ricultural water withdrawal represents 70 percent of all withdrawals. However, as water resources are very unevenly distributed, the impact of these withdrawals varies substantially between countries and regions. An increasing number of the world’s river basins have reached conditions of water scarcity through the combined pressure of agriculture and other sectors. FAO (2011a) estimates that more than 40 percent of the world’s rural population lives in river basins that are classified as water scarce.