--- Source: FAO, 2012c ---

390 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Figure 14.3 Sources of vulnerability across different groups Self-sufficient households without access to markets Food producing households that are net sellers of food Food producing households that are net buyers of food Rural landless and non-farm rural households Poor urban households Loss of access to natural resources Food production risks Food prices rises Loss of income Source: FAO, 2012c The following section highlights important strategies for increasing resilience in agricultural systems under climate change and their implications for investment planning.

Information generation and dissemination. Generating, disseminating and translating information into a useful form is the key response to uncertainty generated by climate change. Much effort has been invested in helping farmers to make more effective climate-sensitive decisions (e.g. planting times and livestock shelter) via improved access to timely, meaningful and trustworthy climate information and knowledge. The invest- ments need to support the development of a technical component developing agro-climate tools (Hansen and Coffey, 2011) — with institutions improving channels both for uptake of information and for demand for that information— supported by new information technology (e.g. information communication technology applica- tions) (Thornton and Lipper, 2013). Investments to generate needed information as well as to support institu- tions/programmes for its dissemination are thus important in CSA.

Insurance. Agricultural insurance has expanded rapidly in recent years, with global agricultural premium value expanding from US$ 8 billion in 2004 to over US$ 20 billion in 2008 (Mahul and Stutley, 2010). However in low-income countries the penetration rates (measured by ratio between agricultural insurance premium value and agricultural gross domestic product) are still very low. Both the private and public sector could have a role in expanding insurance coverage in low-income countries vulnerable to climate risk. The ultimate costs depend on the nature of the support provided. Subsidizing premiums is the most common form of sup- port in high-income countries, which require high levels of public investment. However, concerns have been raised about the effectiveness of such programmes, and their potential to lead to maladaptation by providing incentives to maintain production patterns that are no longer economically viable (Mahul and Stutley, 2010; FAO, 2012e).

Safety nets are a form of social protection comprised of programmes supported by the public sector or non- governmental organizations that provide transfers to the poor to address risks, vulnerability and social exclu- sion. There is a broad range of activities that can fall into this category: conditional and non-conditional cash transfers, food vouchers and subsidies, seed and tool distribution, input subsidies and employment-based programmes such as food-for-work. Over recent years there has been a major expansion in social protection programmes, particularly cash transfers (HLPE, 2012a). Cash transfers have been found to stimulate invest- ments in agriculture and livelihood activities (HLPE, 2012b). Investment costs for such programmes can be quite substantial, but they may not be included in investment plans for the agricultural sector, but rather