--- Reversing trends through CSA ---

46 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Climate change threatens ecosystems Climate change is affecting production systems, disrupting the functioning of ecosystems and increasing the pressure on ecosystem services. In some areas, climate change may also lead to new production possibilities as the long-term impacts may open up new options for agriculture. The frequency of extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods, are predicted to increase. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the impacts of climate change and associated costs will fall disproportionately on developing countries and may undermine the achievement of the global goals of reducing poverty and safeguarding food security (IPCC, 2001). The 2011 drought in the Horn of Africa, which threatened 12 million people with mal- nutrition, disease and loss of livelihoods, is a recent example of an extreme weather event. As such events become more frequent, the number of vulnerable or directly affected people will increase.

Reversing trends through CSA Large-scale environmental degradation is not inevitable and can be reversed (Bai et al., 2008). The Global As- sessment of Land Degradation and Improvement (FAO and ISRIC, 2008) established that while land degrada- tion was still spreading between 1991 and 2008, the trend was not clear cut. There are areas where land qual- ity has been declining (24 percent of the global land surface), but also areas where land quality has improved (16 percent) (Steenbergen et al., 2011). The reversal from degradation to sustainable production has in some cases been very rapid, taking only a matter of years. In many cases, these reversals have been made in areas where populations have increased. There are many examples that illustrate that it is possible to realize the scenario: ‘more people, more trees, more livestock, more water, better lives and better economies’ (e.g. see Critchley, 2010 and Box 2.1).

Sustainably increased productivity and income for better livelihoods The ultimate aim of CSA is to improve livelihoods and sustainably increase productivity through the efficient use of resources. In management planning at the landscape level, diverse groups and institutions work to- gether to increase farm incomes and diversify economic opportunities while ensuring that natural resources are used efficiently and that ecosystem functions and services are protected. One of the primary benefits of placing efforts on coordination at the landscape level is that sectors and production systems that had previ- ously been managed separately and often counterproductively can be integrated in ways that maintain vital ecosystem services needed for all sectors.

Box 2.1 Positive dynamics: re-greening of the Sahel In the 1970s and 80s, the Sahel region experienced disastrous droughts that caused widespread famine. However, over the past three decades, helped by moderate increases in rainfall, hundreds of thousands of farmers in Burkina Faso and Niger have transformed arid landscapes into productive agricultural land by modifying traditional agroforestry, water and soil management practices. This ‘re-greening’ of the Sahel began when local agricultural practices were rediscovered and enhanced in simple, low-cost ways by innovative farmers and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). An evolving coalition of local, national, and international actors promoted the dissemination and continued use of these improved practices. Policy changes regarding land tenure, and changes in opportunities for off-farm employment also contributed to the progress.

To improve water availability and soil fertility in Burkina Faso’s Central Plateau, farmers have sown crops in planting pits and built stone contour bunds. In southern Niger, farmers have developed innovative ways of regenerating and multiplying valuable trees. These lands now support increasing amounts of trees, crops, and livestock, which has enhanced the food security of about 3 million people. Water levels in wells has increased significantly, and some farmers can maintain small vegetable gardens near the wells, which adds to their incomes and improves nutrition.

Although millet and sorghum remain the dominant crops, farmers working on rehabilitated land are also growing cowpea and sesame. With increased quantities of fodder and crop residues, farmers can keep livestock closer to their fields in more intensive and profitable livestock production systems. The manure can then be used as fertilizer to improve soil fertility. These innovations have also greatly improved the supply of fuelwood over the past 20 to 30 years, allowing women to reallocate the time once spent on collecting fuelwood to other activities.

Source: Reij et al., 2009; World Bank, 2011