--- Page 258 ---

245 MODULE 10: Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture 10. 1 Introduction This module addresses the following questions: What are the implications of climate change for the sector in relation to food security, nutrition and livelihoods? How can resilience be built and vulnerability be reduced within fisheries and aquaculture systems? What role does the sector need to do to reduce its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, provide alternative sources of energy and support aquatic systems’ natural GHG sequestra- tion and storage services?

The significance of fisheries and aquaculture Fisheries and aquaculture support the incomes and livelihoods of 660-820 million people, about 10-12 per- cent of the world’s population. The sector has an important role to play in gender equality, poverty and food security. With global fish supply over 150 million tonnes, more than 85 percent of this supply is used directly for food; supplying 15 percent of the world’s protein and essential nutrition for around 4.3 billion consumers (FAO, 2012). The sector generates first sale values of over US$ 218 billion annually, and about 38 percent of production is traded internationally (FAO, 2012). Aquatic systems are also associated with rich biological diver- sity – with at least 27 000 species of fish, shellfish and aquatic plants, in a wide variety of ecosystems, so far identified (FAO, 2010a).

The global population is expected to increase to 9-10 billion by 2050. Expanding populations will create greater demand for aquatic foods, and the importance of fisheries resources and production systems will increase.

However, there are significant concerns for the health of these resources with approximately 30 percent of as- sessed stocks estimated to be overexploited and global fish catches static or even declining (FAO, 2011). Con- sequently, aquaculture will have to satisfy much of the future demand for aquatic foods. To meet this demand, the aquaculture sector may need to increase production by 70-100 percent over current levels in the next two decades. However, aquaculture also faces increasing constraints as competition for land, water, energy and feed resources becomes more acute. These factors, combined with potential impacts of ocean acidification and climate change on ecosystems and on dependent communities, present significant challenges to the entire sector (Brander, 2007). The successful and continued delivery of benefits from fisheries and aquaculture will require the development of clearly targeted policies, sound management, technical changes and investments.

Climate change processes and impacts The impacts of the accumulation of GHGs in the atmosphere and water relate to a number of physical phenom- ena including gradual changes in water temperature, acidification of water bodies, changes in ocean currents and rising sea levels. These physical changes affect ecological functions within aquatic systems and the fre- quency, intensity and location of extreme weather events (Cochrane et al., 2009). A range of impacts on fisher- ies and aquaculture, both direct and indirect, can be expected. These are illustrated in Figure 10.1.

Ecosystem productivity is likely to be reduced in most tropical and subtropical oceans, seas and lakes. In high- latitude ecosystems, productivity is likely to increase (see Box 10.1). Physiological and behavioral processes of fish and the organisms they feed on will also be affected. The impacts, both positive and negative, will depend on the region and latitude. There is increasing evidence that global warming is already modifying the distribu- tion of marine species. Warm-water species are being displaced towards the poles and experiencing changes in their size and the productivity of their habitats.