--- Cultural barriers to climate change adaptation in Northern Burkina Faso ---

340 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Networks Because of the many institutional interactions involved, CSA initiatives rely on networks to support informa- tion exchange and partnership-building. These networks link research institutes (e.g. National Agriculture Research Systems (NARS), universities and international agricultural research institutes), the providers of agricultural advisory and extension services, climate information services and farmers’ organizations.

Specifically formed CSA networks or ‘platforms’ are proliferating regionally and internationally (see Box 12.15).

In addition to sharing and managing knowledge across institutional silos and facilitating institutional coopera- tion in pursuit of shared objectives (Young, 2002), these networks can also fulfil a significant extension role. By centrally training trainers (e.g. professors, regional planning experts, and technology transfer specialists) to go on to train local practitioners in different regions (e.g. extension field agents, local and decentralized plan- ning officers), the benefits of extension can be widely scaled up.

When creating, facilitating or joining a network, it is crucial to be clear about the added value the network intends to provide to its users. Networks can be vast repositories of data, expertise and contacts. However, due to the high rate of network proliferation, staying abreast of all developments and navigating the infor- mation offered can sometimes be overwhelming. Building up a forum for sharing knowledge and discuss- ing new ideas can be time- and resource-intensive. In general, it is better to join already existing platforms and develop new conversations or collaborations within them and leave the creation of new fora for distinct issues.

The most successful networks are those in which users do not view their participation as an additional effort.

Instead, they feel the benefits are concrete enough to merit a commitment to an ongoing engagement with the network. In such cases, following discussions and sharing information via networks becomes part of the normal Box 12.14 Cultural barriers to climate change adaptation in Northern Burkina Faso A 2009 study comparing the ethnic groups Rimaiibe and Fulbe in the village of Biidi 2 in Northern Burkina Faso shows that Rimaiibe are successfully embracing livelihood diversification to adapt to climate change, but the same adaptive approach is not considered viable by Fulbe. The Rimaiiibe’s chief adaptive strategies (labour migration, working for development projects, growing gardens and including women in economic activity) contravene Fulbe’s sense of personal integrity and freedom.

Fulbe identity is bound to the annual practice of transhumance (they herd livestock across Burkina Faso’s central plateau between December and June). Among Fulbe men, transhumance is considered to be a proof of independence and self-worth. Transhumance continues to be pursued even though the plateau is becoming increasingly cultivated and inhabited, which makes the practice more and more difficult. Fulbe view sedentary crop cultivation less favourably than itinerant livestock rearing. In addition, hiring oneself out for work or migrating for labour is not considered an option. Until postcolonial legislation in the 1980s afforded Rimaiibe rights and land, they were effectively slaves to the Fulbe. This history makes Fulbe even more reluctant to be associated with activities that are proving successful for Rimaiibe. Highly prizing their self-sufficiency, Fulbe tend to live scattered in the bush at some distance from the village. The Rimaiibe live closer together in the village. When development practitioners hire workers for day labour, they do so in the village centre, which is easily accessible to Rimaiibe, but not Fulbe. Finally, strongly defined gender roles make Fulbe men reluctant to include women in income-generating activities. These cultural factors that have created barriers to adapting to changing conditions have led to a sharp rise in Fulbe poverty and food insecurity.

These insights offer an idea of how local cultural institutions may complicate the uptake of climate change initiatives that have succeeded in other contexts. Understanding the local culture is useful when formulating project strategies.

In the case of Biidi 2, it became evident that development practitioners needed to meet with Fulbe in the bush and with Rimaiibe in the village. They could not assume that Fulbe would come to the village centre when in need of paid work. Dialogue about cultural practices and beliefs along with an exchange about securing physical and economic well-being is also advisable.

Source: Nielsen and Reenberg, 2010