--- to water of major crops. The Modeling System for Agricultural Impacts of Climate Change (MOSAICC) is an ---

510 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Climate impacts on agriculture An analysis of whether climate variability and change are having an impact (historical, current, and future) on the agriculture sector needs to take into account agricultural input markets, food demands, transportation, distribution channels and agricultural production. Impact assessment models are typically physical models (e.g. crops, hydrology, fisheries and forestry) or economic models that are highly specialized, so that experts in the field may need to be consulted. Aquacrop, for example, is a FAO crop model to simulate yield response to water of major crops. The Modeling System for Agricultural Impacts of Climate Change (MOSAICC) is an integrated package of tools for facilitating an interdisciplinary assessment of the impacts of climate change on agriculture (see Box 18.4).

A common climate impact assessment of agricultural productivity (e.g. crop yield) follows a top-down ap- proach. It requires a good understanding of current and past impacts of climate change on CSA sectors and local perceptions of climate change as well as the collection of long-term historical data of weather and agri- culture. Past climate conditions can be associated with past agricultural productivity to establish causal links and calibrate models. Global climate models can provide future climate projections, based on socio-economic and emission scenarios, and they can be downscaled using appropriate methods. The calibrated models can simulate future impacts of climate change on agriculture with projected climate as an input (see also FAO, 2012b for general methodology). UNFCCC (2010b) provides a review of available agricultural models, includ- ing: agroclimatic indices with geographic information systems (GIS); statistical models and yield functions and process-based crop models; and economic models, such as economic cross-sectional models, farm-level microeconomic models, household and village models, and macroeconomic models. All of these models may be useful for climate impacts assessment for CSA.

Box 18.3 Climate-risk assessment to reduce the vulnerability of livelihoods Central Guinea is dominated by the Fouta Djallon Highlands, a large plateau with altitudes ranging between 600 to 1 500 metres and an annual rainfall of 1 800 millimetres. It is the source of a significant number of important rivers on which many West African countries depend. The plateau is also threatened by a range of impacts associated with climate change. The Guinea NAPA has reported an almost constant decline in annual rainfall, the disruption in normal precipitation patterns and a general downward trend in water available from rivers. These meteorological trends have become more evident during the last decade: rivers and land are drying out; forests are having difficulty recovering; and agricultural production is being affected.

The Global Environmental Facility Fouta Djallon Highlands Integrated Natural Resources Management Project implemented in Guinea and its neighbouring countries, aims at ensuring the conservation and sustainable management of the natural resources to improve the livelihoods of rural populations directly or indirectly connected to the highlands. At the end of the first phase, the importance of reducing rural communities’ vulnerability to climatic disturbances became crucial. However, a clear understanding of the current impact of climate variability was necessary for the project to ensure that the activities would have a positive impact on local resilience to climate change.

Accordingly, a climate-risk assessment of the target communities was undertaken to evaluate the impact of current climate-related hazards on local livelihoods in different agro-ecological zones. During community consultations, farmers reported observing changes in weather patterns over the last decade. These changes included: increased frequency of droughts, extreme heat, delays in the arrival of the rainy season, and scarcity and unpredictability of rains. These perceptions about the changes in the timing, intensity and frequency of climatic hazards are consistent with scientific data. These changes are reported to have significant impacts on farmers. Local perceptions on the connections between climate-livelihood and current and potential coping strategies were discussed and analysed.

The appreciation of how the farmers respond to the climatic risks and the identification of resources that are both sensitive to climatic risks and crucial for implementing the coping strategies helped to incorporate climate-smart practices into the project activities. Originally planned activities were adjusted according to the way project activities could affect the availability of critical livelihood resources and the access of local communities to these resources.

The purpose of the revisions was to make the project’s activities resilient to current climate variability and deal with emerging climate issues.