--- Page 69 ---

56 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK cause profoundly negative consequences for long-term sustainability. Empowering rural communities by facili- tating their organization at the landscape level, through citizen groups or productive institutions (e.g. watershed committees and rural producers associations), can help these communities plan and manage land use more sustainably. It also allows them to improve their livelihoods by harnessing new technologies and knowledge.

Landscape management is an iterative and evolving process. Over time, key assumptions underpinning the work and new elements will need to be re-examined. The participatory process should be a learning process in which social dialogue is constantly being renewed to bring about negotiated agreements involving all stakeholders. For the process to be easily understood and to allow stakeholder involvement in all phases, it needs to be coherent and feasible given the available resources. The process should also be simple and practical and ensure transpar- ency and accountability, so that all stakeholders can meet their responsibilities.

There can be many reasons why conflicts may arise during policy, programme and project implementation. Some factors that can lead to disputes include: policies that are imposed without local participation; conflicting inter- ests among land users; lack of harmony and coordination between legal bodies and procedures; poor identifica- tion of and inadequate consultation with stakeholders; and uncoordinated planning. In addition, poor information sharing, limited institutional capacity, inadequate monitoring and evaluation of programmes, and a lack of effec- tive mechanisms for conflict management are all potential sources for conflict when negotiating and planning climate-smart agricultural activities at the landscape level with multiple stakeholders. It is essential to have in place effective conflict management mechanisms that have been agreed upon by stakeholder groups, that are based on rule of law and supported by institutional structures that everyone recognizes as legitimate.

Promoting landscape governance through policy and finance options Expanding landscape management approaches so that they become significant on a global scale will require sharing and expanding the knowledge-base regarding the uses of natural resources and strengthening institu- tional capacities. An enabling policy and market environment is also needed. As mentioned, achieving multiple objectives at the landscape level will require harmonizing sectoral policies so that different planning frameworks are aligned. So far, many policy, legal and institutional frameworks are based on implementing separate actions for ecosystem management, agricultural productivity, forestry and rural livelihoods. This situation creates prob- lems for interventions that follow a cross-sectoral approach.

A good example of a harmonized approach is the development of the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) mechanism. REDD+ policies address different drivers of deforestation both within and outside the forestry sector. When designing national REDD+ strategies, policies, laws and action plans, consideration should be given to agricultural and rural development goals, and an integrated landscape approach should be adopted.

There is a need for a more supportive policy environment for landscape. In some cases, major policy barriers will need to be removed (see also Module 13 on policies). Joint planning and coordinated interaction between minis- tries is essential and can be fostered through mechanisms for cross-sectoral consultations. Core policy needs, at the local, national and international level are: • compatibility and coordination of policies for agricultural development, forest, water, climate and biodiversity conservation; • environmental legislation that acknowledges the potential and rights of farming communities; and • the removal of public subsidies and incentives that harm biodiversity.

Achieving financial viability for development initiatives that operate at the landscape level requires that the incomes of all stakeholders are sufficiently high to prevent them from engaging in activities detrimental to local ecosystems and sustainable livelihoods. Several possibilities exist for creating these conditions and they are explained in more detail in Module 14 on financial instruments. Payments for environmental services (PES), a mechanism for com- pensating farmers and farming communities for maintaining ecosystem services, is an example of a market-based innovation for scaling up SLM and sustainable forest management. Economic incentives are effective when they