--- Micro-insurance reduces exposure to weather risk in Andra Pradesh, India ---

333 MODULE 12: Local institutions National and international agribusinesses Agribusinesses with supply chains in developing countries are increasingly exploring the potential of buying climate-smart produce or engaging in climate-smart agricultural practices. They are well placed to promote market literacy among smallholder farmers. An advantage of corporate advisory services is that these are of- ten highly specialized, focusing on the specific products being produced in the precise context of their produc- tion. The advisory personnel work exclusively with the contract farmers (Swanson and Rajalahti, 2010). Though strongly localized, this focused and in-depth attention cannot often be matched by public sector or civil society efforts, which usually have broader mandates.

Commercial consultancies Governments or farmer organizations are increasingly choosing to contract commercial consulting firms to provide extension services. This is gaining popularity as private sector service is generally identified with greater efficiency, as the business ethos of providing value for money tends to lead to results-oriented delivery (Anderson and Feder, 2003).

Banks, credit and savings institutions Implementing CSA requires a certain amount of capital to manage the transition to the new climate-smart practices. Liaising with credit-giving institutions to provide appropriate means (e.g. microfinance loans) to smallholder farmers can enable a wider uptake of CSA practices (see Box 12.7. and module 14 on financial instruments and investments). Reaching out to inform smallholder farmers about the available funding and insurance options is essential.

Purchasers of carbon credits Private sector actors (e.g. multinational businesses) seeking to offset their carbon footprints by purchasing emissions reductions on the carbon markets represent a viable source of financing for agricultural climate change mitigation projects, including those that promote agroforestry.

Box 12.7 Micro-insurance reduces exposure to weather risk in Andra Pradesh, India The changing climate threatens agricultural productivity in Asia. Higher temperatures and increased drought and flooding, which degrade the soil, can result in large-scale crop failure and decreased productivity over the long term.

For most Indian farmers, traditional crop insurance has not been a viable option for managing such weather risks.

Insurance providers faced high costs of measuring crop damage for large numbers of smallholder farmers, and as a result, coverage premiums were too expensive for small-scale rural producers.

In 2003, however, a partnership between ICICI Lombard General Insurance and BASIX, a Hyderabad-based microfinance institution, with technical support from the World Bank, piloted the sale of rainfall index insurance contracts to smallholder farmers in Andra Pradesh. This project represents the first farmer-level weather index- based insurance in the developing world.

Contrary to traditional weather insurance, index-based insurance uses the strong correlation between crop yields and rainfall to trigger insurance payments to policy holders when rainfall falls below a certain level. Indicators can vary according to the local climatic conditions relevant to the policy holder. The scheme does not require insurance companies to assess crop damages for individual farmers, and this greatly cuts transaction costs and allows for more affordable policies.

The scheme began on a small scale with 230 participants and focused only on crop-specific risks. By 2005, the scheme was considering the risk exposure to climate variations of an entire district. During the 2005 monsoon, BASIX sold over 7 600 policies to almost 7 000 customers across six states. Complementary partnerships with local organizations and effective and transparent communications with farmers were crucial to the scheme’s success. Innovative features like doorstep delivery and quick payouts when index triggers are reached helped build trust and confidence. The partnership’s communication strategy enabled farmers to understand insurance as a product. The strategy also channelled customer feedback to ICICI, which adapted its product designs to suit different local conditions and needs.

Source: UNFCCC, 2013b