--- Page 67 ---

54 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Local stakeholders and institutions responsible for coordinating and facilitating landscape management ac- tivities need to be empowered to make informed decisions with a long-term perspective. Other stakeholders from the subnational and national level, and occasionally from the international level, will also participate in the landscape management planning process. It is essential to audit the state of land, water and other natural resources in a way that quantifies the impacts of climate change. Ideally this should be done at the river basin, watershed, or agro-ecosystem level. When the impacts of climate change are uncertain, no-regret options should be proposed based on existing experiences and research.

It is worth investing time and effort early in the participatory process in order to build trust and collaboration when planning landscapes. It may also be necessary to adopt new practices and ways of thinking at the farm level and modify governance structures (e.g. land tenure regimes and decentralization).

A participatory process can strengthen stakeholders’ sense of ownership of the objectives of landscape man- agement and encourage them to engage in defined activities. However, engaging in a participatory process is often time consuming. Results may not be perceived immediately as processes of social change can take generations. It is therefore important that stakeholders involved in the process, especially those that do not live in the area, tolerate uncertainty and see landscape management as a long-term activitiy. However, landscape management also needs to achieve some short-term results that can provide stakeholders with incentives to continue the process. In view of limitations in time and resources, external project interventions have to be catalytic in nature, triggering change while ensuring inclusiveness.

Carrying out interrelated actions at different levels also means making trade-offs. Managing natural resources and community needs at a landscape level involves linking actions undertaken on smaller land units to land-use management at the broader landscape level. For example, there are trade-offs that may need to be made be- tween increasing productivity and reducing GHG emissions, and between different land uses (e.g. harvesting non- timber products and logging in forests). Defining, evaluating and balancing different legitimate interests and ob- jectives to create a common vision is central to integrated landscape management. A shared vision ensures that there is alignment among the various local management and production strategies, national development strate- gies, climate and environmental strategies, as well as among policies, institutions and other enabling structures.

When discussions about change become the core of the planning process, they are expected to lead to behav- ioural changes and sustainable outcomes (Sangha Group, 2008). To ensure that they can participate actively in policy and decision-making processes, local stakeholders should receive the support they need to ensure that they can protect their rights and livelihood choices.

The contractual agreement emerging from this negotiated process is the result of a participatory process, which includes plans for local development activities or initiatives (short, medium, and long term) that are de- fined by different stakeholders in a given landscape. To implement this contractual agreement, external sup- port may be required to build capacities and create opportunities to access resources. In addition to concrete agreement on activities, institutional arrangements and the distribution of resources, the negotiated process also leads to improved social cohesion within the communities in the landscape. The least powerful stakehold- ers gain increased bargaining power to defend their interests. The process also incorporates the diversity of stakholders’ interests that might otherwise not be voiced and integrated in decision-making processes (more on local institutions in Module 12).

Both policy-makers and land users gain from organized and democratic planning that aligns land use with local and national goals. Ideally, land-use planning is a countrywide effort, from grassroot villages through dis- tricts and provinces, that harmonizes local needs with national priorities. Relevant stakeholders may include village and municipal authorities, private sector interests, district authorities and members of the country’s planning ministry or national planning commission. At the local level, it is important that all community groups are represented, including men and women, young and old, wealthy and poor, farmers and herders (FAO, 2009).