--- Page 84 ---

71 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems tangible elements of the ecosystem’s good and services (e.g. impacts of land use and management practices on soil, water, biomass, biodiversity, and its social and economic implications).

The method, which takes into consideration biophysical, social, economic, and ecological dimensions (see Table 2.2), is cost-effective and can be conducted in a relatively short amount of time. For the Kagera Basin, which covers nearly 60 000 km2, the entire assessment cost around US$ 150 000. Included in these costs was capacity development in methods for the participatory expert assessment with multiple sectors, quality control, and the validation and finalization of the database and maps. In this case, six months were sufficient to complete a first draft set of maps. One year should be sufficient to complete the entire validation process and make available the data set and maps for future planning by districts and technical sectors.

Table 2.2 The various dimensions used by the LADA questioinnaire for mapping method Biophysical Use of the land Ecological Socio-Economic Elevation, slope, hydrology, land cover soil, soil fertility Climate: temperature, rainfall Livestock density, crop type, land use Population density, poverty Direct causes of land degradation or SLM due to land use and management practices Indirect causes of land degradation (driving forces) or SLM Trend in land-use change and intensity of trend variation Type, rate, degree, and extent of land degradation Type, extent, effectiveness of SLM technologies Impacts on ecological services (water, soils, biomass, biodiversity, climate): negative or positive impact due to land degradation or SLM Impacts on productive and socio-economic services: negative and positive impact due to land degradation or SLM After finalizing the collection and validation process, the data and maps are used to guide the cross-sectoral interventions at the landscape level so that multiple goals, including those that address specific climate threats, can be reached. In this way, LADA can be used to promote sustainable and climate-smart land resource management.

Lessons learned and recommendations An important lesson that has been learned is that the data and maps can be used to: inform the project intervention strategy; identify best SLM practices for scaling up; and guide effective and responsive interventions at various scales.

This is backed up by SLM implementation at the farm and catchment levels, field assessments of SLM performance and impacts, and an analysis of constraints to wider uptake.

This process will in turn inform policy making, planning and budgetary allocations by technical sectors at the district and transboundary levels and will establish a baseline for more integrated landscape management approaches. A handover and ownership building process is under way to transfer the results to select governmental institutions. Decision makers in the four countries will be assisted in analysing what type of land degradation processes are occurring, including those exacerbated by climate change; where they are happening; what are the trends and why; and what are the expected ecological and socio-economic impacts. An example of the type of issue that could be analysed would be how changes in carbon storage in soil and biomass resulting from certain land-use practices would affect the supply of food and energy and agro-ecopological resilience. Decision makers will also be informed about how to analyse current SLM technologies and approaches in terms of extent and trends, and their effectiveness in reversing land degradation and improving SLM.

For example, a comparison of maps showing degradation (Figures 2.1 and 2.2) and SLM effectiveness (Figure 2.3) will allow decision makers to identify areas requiring interventions, select good practices that can be scaled up, and choose additional SLM measures that are needed to address specific degradation problems (see figure 2.1). Policy makers should