--- Tarp, 2002; Sadoulet and de Janvry, 1995; Fafchamps, 1992; Roe and Graham-Tomasi, 1986), lower likelihood ---

389 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture Farmers’ investment behaviour Given the importance of farmers as a source of agricultural investment, the potential impacts of climate change on farm investment decision-making is a critical issue to consider, and explicitly account for, in agricultural investment planning. Since the changes in agricultural systems needed to achieve agricultural growth for food security under climate change are largely built upon sustainable agricultural intensification activities, it is useful to also look at the lessons learned on farmers’ investment patterns across different farming systems and socio-economic conditions. There are generally a range of possible options for sustainable agricultural intensification. Therefore, building an evidence base to identify which are most suitable to meet agricultural development goals under climate change (e.g. explicitly accounting for adaptation and mitigation impacts as well as food security and economic growth) is an important step in developing climate-smart agricultural strategies and investment plans.

In this section we highlight two important areas where climate change affects the incentives and constraints ag- ricultural producers face in making investment decisions: increasing risk and uncertainty and augmenting the benefits of resource use efficiency (as well as the costs of inefficiency). Both of these factors are well recognized as important issues in agricultural investment behaviour in the context of sustainable agricultural intensifica- tion, and this module recommends building on this knowledge in assessing the potential impacts of climate change and potential public investments needed to address associated barriers to farm level investment. The responses to these two challenges as well as the implications for agricultural investments are often interlinked.

Coping with increased risk and uncertainty Climate change is already having effects on the risks and uncertainty that farmers face, and this has important implications for their decisions on agricultural investment. A large body of research on the effects of risk and uncertainty on farm decision-making indicates that they significantly change investment patterns in a num- ber of possible ways: the selection of low-re urn but low-risk subsistence crops for investment (Heltberg and Tarp, 2002; Sadoulet and de Janvry, 1995; Fafchamps, 1992; Roe and Graham-Tomasi, 1986), lower likelihood of applying purchased inputs such as fertilizer (Dercon and Christiaensen, 2011; Kassie et al., 2008), lower likelihood of adopting new technologies (Feder et al., 1985; Antle and Crissman, 1990) and lower overall levels of investment (Skees et al., 1999). All of these responses generally lead to both lower current and future farm profits (Hurley, 2010; Rosenzweig and Binswanger, 1993).

Managing risk and uncertainty at the farm level is thus essential in creating an enabling environment for farm- ers to invest in CSA practices. This in turn has implications for the development of public sector investment strategies: what does the public sector need to invest in to provide the enabling environment for managing risk and uncertainty under climate change? Gitz and Meybeck (2012) argue that there are three ways to increase resilience2 in agricultural systems to address climate change risks: 1) reduce exposure; 2) reduce the sen- sitivity of systems to shocks; and 3) increase adaptive capacity. Measures can be taken ex-ante, ex-poste or during shocks and they comprise actions aimed at increasing resilience in ecosystems as well as in social and economic systems. The measure that will be most effective in increasing resilience in any specific context will depend on the main sources of vulnerability.

Figure 14.3 below, illustrates different sources of vulnerability across a range of household types, differentiat- ed according to their entitlements to food (e.g. through own production and purchased with wage, agricultural income or transfers) (Sen, 1981). The figure illustrates that the main source of vulnerability to food insecurity can range from a production loss to market disruptions and volatile food prices. In analysing the public invest- ment requirements to mitigate climate change induced vulnerability in the agricultural sector it is important to identify the nature of the vulnerability in order to develop an effective response. Planning and investments to increase resilience must also take into account the effects of increased uncertainty on developing “no regrets” strategies and avoiding maladaption (Gitz and Meybeck, 2012). 2 Resilience is defined as “increasing the capacity of systems, communities, households or individuals to prevent, mitigate or cope with risk and recover from shocks.” Gitz and Meybeck, 2012. p.29.