--- 2007a). According to the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) (Nelson ---

6 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK A prospective study in Morocco (World Bank, 2009a) points to gradually increasing aridity due to reduced rainfall and higher temperatures, with negative effects on agricultural yields, especially from 2030 onwards.

Rainfed crops are expected to be particularly affected. If irrigation water continues to be available in suf- ficient quantities, crop yields are expected to continue to increase in spite of climate change. However, avail- ability of water for irrigation is uncertain. In this study, agricultural yields are projected to remain more or less stable up to 2030, but they are predicted to drop rather quickly beyond that date (see Module 3 on water management).

A study in Brazil (EMBRAPA, 2008) shows that climate change can have dramatic changes in the potentials for the various crops analysed and their geographic repartition. Globally, the increase of evapotranspiration leads to an increase of the areas at high climatic risk for 7 of the 9 crops studied (cotton, rice, coffee, beans, sunflower, millet, soybean) and a decrease for cassava and sugarcane. It will also cause important displace- ments in areas suitable for crops, especially for coffee and cassava. In traditional production areas, coffee would be affected by lack of water or high temperatures. In the States of São Paulo and Minas Gerais coffee would no longer be cultivated in areas where it is currently cultivated. On the other hand, with the reduc- tion of the risk of frost, there could be an increase of the production area in Paraná, Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul. As a result, the global area at low climatic risk for coffee would be reduced by 9.5 percent in 2020, 17 percent in 2050, and 33 percent in 2070. On the other hand, more favourable conditions for sugar- cane will considerably increase the area of production.

The impacts of climate change will have major effects on agricultural production, with a decrease of produc- tion in certain areas and increased variability of production to the extent that important changes may need to be made in the geographic area where crops are cultivated. Local impacts will bring global imbalances.

Broadly speaking, with everything else being equal, climate change may lead to an increase in both crop and livestock productivity in mid- to high latitudes (IPCC, 2007a) and a decrease in tropical and subtropi- cal areas. Among the most affected areas are economically vulnerable countries already food insecure and some important food exporting countries. This will induce significant changes in trade, impacting prices and the situation of net food importing countries. Consequently, climate change is expected to increase the gap between developed and developing countries as a result of more severe impacts in already vulnerable developing regions, exacerbated by their relatively lower technical and economical capacity to respond to new threats (Padgham, 2009). Smallholders and pastoralists will suffer complex, localized impacts (IPCC, 2007a). According to the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) (Nelson et al.., 2010), it will cause an increase of between 8.5 and 10.3 percent in the number of malnourished children in all developing countries, relative to scenarios without climate change.

The models used for such projections neither take into account the impacts of multiple stress induced by climate change, nor the impacts on the functioning of ecosystems, such as effects on pollinators (FAO, 2011a) and the balance between pests and their predators, nor impacts on animal diseases (FAO-OECD, 2012; HLPE, 2012 a).

It is likely that there will also be important effects on nutrition as a result of climate change. To date, studies mostly focus on cereals. There is a need to better capture all the nutritional consequences of the effects of climate change on livestock and on vegetables and wild foods, all of which have an important role in balanced diets and which are at risk (HLPE, 2012a; Bharucha and Pretty, 2010).

In terms of impacts, it is necessary to distinguish between increased variability and slow onset changes. The potential impacts of increased variability are often less emphasized than slow onset changes for a variety of reasons. This is because these impacts are less well known (HLPE 2012a) even though they will be felt first. The impacts of increased variability are situated between the much emphasized category of ‘extreme events’, and the much more ‘easier to grasp’ business as usual category of actual variability. What exactly is an ’extreme event’? What makes an event considered as “extreme”? Is it the intensity, the infrequency of a meteorological event? Or is it the extent and intensity of its consequences? For agriculture, a slight change