--- Page 539 ---

526 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Scales, leakage, permanency, externality and ancillary impact Climate change interventions implicitly address longer-term and larger-scale processes. They also involve a greater number of potential tradeoffs. Unlike many projects where monitoring and evaluation addresses areas, beneficiaries and stakeholders within the project’s ‘boundaries’ for a shorter subsequent period, CSA projects are more likely to require longer-term post-project monitoring of trends and additional comparison areas. As climate change initiatives cannot be developed or implemented in isolation, multi-criteria and mul- tiple objective analyses can help to assess tradeoffs.

Some expected outcomes and impacts may not be able to be evaluated at the time of project monitoring and evaluation. This is particularly true for monitoring and evaluation of mitigation benefits. Increases in soil car- bon content in response to improved practices cannot continue indefinitely. Eventually, soil carbon storage will approach a new equilibrium where carbon gains equal carbon losses. A default time period, usually 20 years, is assumed for this transition.

The issue of leakages and permanency is important for the monitoring and evaluation of climate change miti- gation. Permanency refers to the principle that emission reductions represented by an offset should be main- tained over time. In some cases, abandoning a CSA practice after only a few years will counterbalance the emissions previously avoided, and sometimes it may even surpass the emissions abated. This is why frequent monitoring is required to take into account such risks. Leakage refers to a situation where emissions abate- ment achieved in one location is offset by increased emissions in unregulated locations. In this regard, the difficulty lies in the choice of appropriate boundaries to conduct the appraisal.

A measure adopted for CSA may bring short-term benefits, while the same measure may lead to maladapta- tion over the long term and vice versa (Hedger et al., 2008; Villanueva, 2010). The timing of monitoring and evaluation needs to be chosen to address both short- and long-term impacts. Different targets may be set for different time scales. Consideration of successful pathways for implementing CSA at different time scales will help improve the design of monitoring and evaluation systems. Ideally, additional evaluations are done after the project ends. Institutions should have good information storage and retrieval systems in place to support monitoring and evaluation (Lamhauge et al., 2011; Hedger et al., 2008).

Accounting for externalities and ancillary impacts should also be considered, even if they are far more difficult to evaluate than the abatement of GHGs or improvements in adaptive capacities. Virtually every CSA option will produce some positive impact (e.g. clean water or more pollinators) or negative externality and/or ancillary impact (e.g pollution or loss of biodiversity). Whether quantifiable or not, these impacts represent real costs or benefits and should be factored into the monitoring and evaluation process.

Availability of data and information All assessment, monitoring and evaluation activities require data on a range of subjects, including: climate, agriculture, socio-economic conditions, capacities and livelihoods. The quality of data directly affects the qual- ity of assessment, monitoring and evaluation. Analyses based on poor quality data are of very limited value.

Natural climate variability can best be described with long-term climate data that covers many decades. An- thropogenic climate change alters climate variability and mean climate. To characterize current and historical impacts of climate change on agriculture for the assessment purposes for policy and project design, good quality, continuous and long-term climate data are necessary (e.g. temperature, rainfall, wind, solar radiation, humidity, evaporation and runoff). Along with climate data, agricultural statistics describing the state of agri- culture are necessary for the same time span. Such data includes crop yields and areas under cultivation, as well as fish and wood production. However, data availability and quality are often an issue in many developing countries (OECD, 2009; UNFCCC, 2010a; Lamhauge et al., 2011).

Future climate projections are produced by global climate models at relatively coarse spatial resolution of 100 kilometres or larger. Downscaled climate information at finer spatial scales is usually not readily available in a