--- Page 54 ---

Module 2:
MANAGING LANDSCAPES
FOR CLIMATE-SMART
AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS

Overview
This module describes how a gradual transition to climate-smart agriculture (CSA) can take place. The
first section describes the landscape approach and explains why this approach should be followed when
moving towards CSA. In a landscape approach, the management of production systems and natural re-
sources covers an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services, but small enough to be man-
aged by the people using the land which is producing those services.
The module’s second section outlines different elements of the landscape approach and offers sugges-
tions about how the approach could be implemented. The approach integrates many different sectors,
engages multiple stakeholders and operates on a number of different scales. The second section also
looks at multistakeholder negotiations and planning. It gives insights into policy and finance options for
promoting integrated landscape governance and highlights the importance of monitoring landscapes.
The third section presents case studies that illustrate what the implementation of a landscape approach
looks like in practice.
Key messages
• Managing agriculture, forestry and fisheries at a landscape scale is key to achieving sustainable
development.
• Appropriate land-use planning and decision making at the landscape level should be based on a par-
ticipatory, consensus-based and people-centred approach.
• Production sectors are often managed in isolation from each other, and this can be counterproduc-
tive. Coordination at the landscape level facilitates the integrated management of production systems
and the natural resources that underpin ecosystem services needed for all sectors. Climate-smart
agriculture, which follows a landscape approach, can address the challenges involved in intersectoral
natural resources management.
• Measuring and monitoring the multiple benefits of climate-smart landscapes is essential for tracking
the impact of intersectoral efforts.
• Scaling up CSA and moving from pilot projects to large-scale programme and policies by applying
a landscape approach requires a diverse range of strategies and practices. It is important to create
awareness and partnerships between sectors, mainstream CSA into policies and build capacities at
all levels. These activities must be supported by an enabling policy and market environment.