--- Page 169 ---

156 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK CSA objectives Sustainable increases in productivity and income Strengthened resilience to climate change and variability Agriculture’s reduced impact on climate change Increased access to modern energy services Increased access to modern energy services þ?

General:

Availability of energy for productive use (both for primary production and value-adding processing) and reduction of food losses (e.g. through improved processing, packaging and storage) can enable improved use of natural resources and increased productivity and profits.

Provision of modern energy services through renewable forms of energy is likely to lead to sustainable increases in productivity and income (particularly where locally produced), whereas if fossil fuels are used there could be productivity and income benefits along with negative environmental consequences. Trade- offs need to be assessed in the local context and taken into account.

More affordable energy services may be less energy efficient (e.g. cheaper tractors may be less efficient). þ General:

Increased access to modern energy services enables enhanced adaptive capacity through the ability to increase and diversify income, for example through adding value to primary production and through enhanced storage of products. ý General:

Increased access to modern energy services will generally lead to increased energy consumption. This will often lead to increased GHG emissions (although these could be insignificant for some renewable energy sources). However, in the case where access to modern energy services displaces unsustainable use of wood for energy, the resulting reduction in deforestation and forest degradation could lead to reduced GHG emissions.

Increased access to modern energy services may or may not lead to increased energy efficiency – this depends in part on the stage of development and level of energy consumption of a country/agri-food system (see above cell for energy efficiency versus climate change mitigation).

Specific:

Bioenergy technologies that retain more nutrients (e.g. anaerobic digestion) versus those that retain less nutrients (e.g. gasification and combustion).

Legend: þ = Synergy between energy-smart food and CSA objectives ? = Synergy between energy-smart food and CSA objectives with some significant caveats ý = No clear trend 5.3 Moving forward – possible energy solutions for CSA FAO projections to 2030 indicate that in developing countries the proportion of land cultivated by hand and with animal power will decrease. This shift in agricultural practices offers opportunities for increased productiv- ity and reduced drudgery for farmers. However, expensive machinery and equipment are often unavailable to poor farmers. Innovative business and community models are required to ensure that smallholder farmers are able to access improved technologies (e.g. through rental schemes or cooperatives). The move to more highly mechanized farming systems is likely to reduce farm labour requirements and reduce employment opportu- nities in rural areas. Well-designed policies and programmes are required to create alternative employment opportunities along the agricultural value chain and in other non-agricultural rural livelihoods.