--- Page 388 ---

Module 14:
Financing climate-smart
agriculture

Overview
Investments made in the agricultural sector are intended to achieve multiple objectives, such as agri-
cultural growth for food security, poverty reduction and economic development. Climate change, already
evident in the increased frequency of extreme weather events, is projected to have profound effects on
the agricultural sector in the future. It has become necessary to explicitly incorporate projections of fu-
ture impacts of climate change into today’s investment planning. Integrating adaptation to existing and
future threats posed by climate change into current agricultural planning and investment is essential
for reducing vulnerability to the impact of climate change and the costs of dealing with these impacts.
It is also essential to identify and account for mitigation potential. Reducing projected emissions growth
from agricultural development can slow the progression of climate change and reduce the costs of ad-
aptation. Many mitigation actions are synergistic with activities that promote agricultural growth and
have the potential to attract new sources of finance for sustainable agriculture.
This module gives an overview of how climate change alters agricultural investment needs. It focuses
on agricultural growth to support food security and poverty reduction objectives in developing coun-
tries. The first part of the module summarizes the current state of agricultural investment in devel-
oping countries, including major sources, levels and composition, and looks at how climate change
adaptation and mitigation affect investment needs. It also provides insights as to how climate change
affects farmers’ investment behaviour and the implications that this has for public sector investments
to support the adoption by farmers of climate-smart agriculture (CSA).
The second part of the module describes the current and future potential of climate finance to support
CSA. Six sources of climate finance are analysed in terms of their potential for CSA investment financ-
ing: financing mechanisms directly under the UNFCCC; UN organizations or programmes; Multilat-
eral Development Banks (MDBs); bilateral public financing channels; compliance and voluntary carbon
markets; and private sector investors and philanthropy. The module concludes with a look at emerging
opportunities for CSA financing and the need for national actions that ensure readiness to access this
financing.
Key messages
• Current agricultural investment flows are insufficient to adequately finance sustainable agricultural
development. This financing deficit is due not only to a lack of overall funds, but also to the fact that
the activities that are currently allocated resources do not generate the highest returns for sustain-
able agricultural growth. The main sources of agricultural investment finance are the farmers, herd-
ers, fishers and foresters themselves. For this reason, public investment that enables agricultural
producers to make investments in CSA is a priority.
• The changes in agricultural systems needed to achieve agricultural growth for food security under
climate change are largely built upon sustainable agricultural intensification activities. Building an
evidence base to identify the most suitable activities (e.g. explicitly accounting for adaptation and mit-
igation impacts) is an essential part of developing CSA strategies, investments and financing plans.