--- Source: ICTSD, 2009 ---

269
MODULE 10: Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture
Box 10.9
Impacts on and the role of trade in supporting climate change adaptation in the
fisheries and aquaculture sector
The overall implications of climate change for fisheries trade are not well known. However, climate change will
increase uncertainties in the supply of fish from the sector. Climate-induced changes in natural resources used
for fishing and aquaculture will require fishing communities, producers, processors, fish traders and exporters to
adapt. Changes in total fish catch, the composition of the catch, and the distribution of fish resulting from climate
change could affect global import and export patterns. Moreover, fisheries export revenues could be affected as well
as the contribution of fisheries sector exports to total exports. Likewise, the potential occurrence of sea level rise
and greater frequency of extreme events will have an impact on ports and other physical infrastructure that support
trade fisheries operations. These events are likely to add to the costs of fishing and could affect the competitiveness
of exports.
Trade policy can play an important role in reducing vulnerability. Appropriately designed trade policies and rules
can contribute to eliminating economic distortions, such as harmful subsidies, which encourage overcapacity
and overfishing. Such reforms would also enhance the supply-side capacities and competitiveness of sustainably
managed fisheries. Reforms that discourage economically unviable fishery operations can stimulate economic
diversification. Trade policies can equally be important in supporting adaptive capacities.
Trade-related assistance and climate change financing mechanisms could be used in a complementary and
reinforcing manner, as parts of efforts to render developing countries’ fisheries sector and economies more resilient
to climate impacts and other external shocks. For example, assistance to strengthen trade-related infrastructure
could enhance both the trade-related supply-side capacities and the climate change adaptation needs of developing
countries. Key complementary policies should also effectively promote the diversification of production and exports;
foster the production of higher value-added processed goods; and develop the supply-side capacities of small-scale
and artisanal fisheries and other vulnerable actors within the sector.
Developing countries should continue to argue for the elimination of distorting fisheries subsidies and the reduction
of tariff escalation and other barriers to trade. This may promote more efficient use of fisheries resources and
enhance market access for their fisheries products and increase their development opportunities. Moreover, they
should maintain enough policy space that could allow them to adopt measures to restructure their economies. This
will be instrumental to make developing countries’ fisheries and their economies at large more resilient to climate
change and other external shocks.
In addition, some measures being proposed to address climate change may have negative trade implications for
developing countries. Initiatives to reduce carbon emissions and mitigate climate change, like the ‘food miles’
campaign, for instance, may negatively impact developing countries’ fish exports, given their distance from import
markets. Food miles refer to the distance food travels from its production until it reaches the consumer. However,
the concept only centres on one part of the carbon footprint, namely transport, ignoring other parts of the production
process. But if the entire supply chain is considered, fisheries exporters operating in developing countries may
produce goods with a lower carbon footprint. Finally, eco-labelling could provide new market opportunities and
increase the value added to fishery and aquaculture products.
Combined with efforts to reduce overcapacity and overfishing, trade and trade policies could be instrumental to
foster resilience to climate change in developing countries. Appropriately designed trade rules can discourage
economically unviable and environmentally damaging fishing, provide support mechanisms to preserve supply-side
capacity in developing countries and create policy space in support of adaptation to climate change in developing
countries.
Below are some essential steps for supporting the role of trade in climate change adaptation in fisheries and
aquaculture:
• Eliminate non-tariff barriers to fish trade that distort world supply and demand.
• Eliminate tariff escalation for high-value fisheries imports that distort world supply and demand.
• Encourage domestic and regional trade in fish and fisheries products to reduce the carbon imprint of fish trade.
• Support research on the impacts of climate change and climate change policies on trade in fish products.
• Develop options for product and export diversification through appropriate economic and trade policies.
• Market and label goods produced following recognized energy efficient standards (e.g. eco-labelling)

Source: ICTSD, 2009