--- part of the FAO Dairy Training Programme for the Small Scale Dairy Sector. The facility helps to fill raw milk into ---

306 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK However, even if advanced packaging technologies are available, social, economic and cultural factors, includ- ing gender issues, could play a role in explaining why the technology is not upgraded or adopted in developing countries. One of the major factors is the lack of incentives and insufficient support to repair and maintain the facilities (FAO, 2011a).

In addition, even with optimal packaging material and technology, there is no 100 percent guarantee that loss- es do not take place. For example, food packaging can make it difficult to for a consumer to access the whole product and thereby causes losses (i.e. the product that remains in the package). The way products are pack- aged has an impact on food being lost and wasted. Andersson et al. (1998) undertook a study on the Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) of tomato ketchup. Part of the research included the collection of ketchup bottles of 30 people at the point of disposal. Even though this survey was quite limited, the losses measured significantly varied from 0.5 percent to 26 percent (Andersson et al., 1998). In addition to this, losses may result due to external factors, such as the mode of transportation, the state of roads, regulations and consumer behaviour (FAO, 2011b).

With regard to consumer behavior, it not only depends on how the consumer handles the product and what it done with the packaging material, as some consumers may reuse or recycle it for other purposes, but also whether supermarkets and retailers are putting ‘unnecessary’ packaging on the product.

The following example is a low cost milk pasteurizing, packaging and chilling system (see Box 11.4), which helps to reduce spillage and spoilage. As this system incorporates these three activities, the value that was previously added to the product as a result of other chain actors engaging in these activities now goes to the small-scale milk producers themselves, possibly resulting in higher incomes.

Box 11.3 Low cost milk pasteurizing-packaging-chilling system – the MILKPRO Small scale milk processors in developing countries often do not have the equipment to pasteurize and package fresh milk due to the high investment cost and potentially expensive conventional packaging material. They often use cans or boilers in which they can heat their milk. However, high temperatures can lead to post-pasteurization contamination, which is the main cause of spoilage.

The MILKPRO is a low cost, simple milk pasteurizing and packaging unit, which was first field tested in Kenya as part of the FAO Dairy Training Programme for the Small Scale Dairy Sector. The facility helps to fill raw milk into pre-formed polyethylene sachets. These small bags are immediately sealed, pasteurized through treatment at 65 degrees Celsius for 30 minutes and then cooled to 50 degrees Celsius. Post-pasteurization contamination is largely avoided due to the milk being pasteurized within the sachet. The sachet when refrigerated can have a shelf-life of up to 15 days. It is estimated that the unit can manage up to 100 litres of milk an hour. The costs of the system lie below US$ 10 000; when on a daily basis it handles 750 litres. Therefore, the break-even point would be at 12 months. The MILKPRO system has been widely adopted by small farmer groups as well as individual farmers as they benefit from the value addition through the packaging, pasteurizing and chilling of their own milk (FAO, 2000).

Milk Sales Pasteurisation System Copyright, Milk-Pro International http://www.milk-pro.com/milkpro.htm