--- Costa Rica and Nicaragua ---

533 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation Table 18.7 Environmental service indices of different landscapes in Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua Land use Carbon index Biodiversity index Total Degraded pasture 0 0 0 Live fences 0.3 0.3 0.6 Fodder banks 0.3 0.5 0.8 Natural pasture with low tree density 0.1 0.1 0.2 Improved pasture with high tree density 0.6 0.7 1.3 Secondary forest 1 1 2 In addition, water quality (biological oxygen demand) was measured to provide accurate information and understanding of the potential of intensified SPS in providing local ecological services. Table 18.7 provides the indices of some of the main land-use types.

These indices were used to develop the payment of an environmental service system. The year-to-year changes in the index of the different farm plots served as the basis for determining the amount to be paid for these services. For example, if farmers improved plot 1 (now in native pasture) to improved pasture with a high density trees (such as now in plot 2) they would have a 1.1 increase in the index, which, on the basis of US$ 7.5 per tonne of carbon would be equivalent to US$ 82.50 (1.1 index point increment, multiplied by 10 tonnes per index point, multiplied by US$ 7.5 per tonne of carbon per hectare).

The attraction of this system is that: • It uses a landscape approach to enhance climate mitigation and adaptation. • It is relatively easy to administer, as it is mainly GPS based. Costs per hectare for routine data collection to administer the payment of the environmental service system were about US$ 1 per hectare. • Farmers clearly understand the system, as shown through their adoption of those strategies that were most profitable.

Overall the project was a striking example of a win-win-win: • Farmers’ income per hectare increased by 15 percent over the project period. • Carbon sequestration over the entire project area (12 000 hectares) increased by 1.6 tonnes of carbon (or 3.5 tonne CO2 eqv.) per hectare per year. In addition, a case study on a small number of farms indicates that silvopastoral technologies decreased emissions of methane by 21 percent and nitrous oxide by 36 percent. • The number of bird, mollusc and butterfly species in the three pilot areas has doubled. • Water quality improved significantly. In the one pilot area where it was measured, the biological oxygen demand declined from 11 to below 1.3. • The inclusion of fodder shrubs enhanced climate resilience by providing high quality livestock feed in the dry season.

The project is now being scaled up in Colombia, and the SPS approach is being integrated into national systems in Costa Rica and Nicaragua.

Source: World Bank, 2008