--- Tilapia Volta Project in West Africa ---

182 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Capture fisheries are the only remaining major source of food that is based on wild resources. The sustain- able management of these wild resources requires in situ conservation. Because they are common property, unmanaged open-access fisheries tend to be overexploited, which has the potential to drive local species into extinction. The private sector, national governments, regional fishery management bodies and scientific institutions are all involved in conserving these resources in their natural environments, so that fisheries can continue to provide the services that communities and economies depend on. Maintaining the health of wild aquatic resources, their gene-pool and the ecosystems that support them will allow fisheries systems and fishers to adapt to new climatic conditions (see also Module 10 on fisheries). Box 6.6 provides an example of a subregional programme for improving fish for aquaculture and protecting native gene pools.

When managed in an integrated way, entire agro-ecosystems, including useful species (such as cultivated crops, forages and agroforestry species) and their wild and weedy relatives, can be highly productive and resilient systems (see more on landscapes in Module 2). For example, the Kuttanad Wetland, the only farm- ing system in India in which rice is cultivated below sea level (see Box 6.7), contributes to the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services and supports the livelihoods of local communities.

Ex situ conservation Ex situ conservation is the maintenance of genetic material outside of the natural environment where the species have evolved. This type of conservation maintains the genetic integrity of the material at the time of collecting and is a static form of conservation. Gene banks, botanical gardens and zoos are typical examples of ex situ conservation facilities.

Box 6.6 Tilapia Volta Project in West Africa The Tilapia Volta Project brings together national fisheries institutions and national environmental institutions from six West African countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali and Togo). The project protects native gene pools of tilapia by characterizing wild genetic resources, which can also serve as a measure for adapting to climate change, and establishing a conservation plan that includes the identification of conservation zones. At the same time, the project is developing an improved aquaculture strain of Nile tilapia (the cichlid species Oreochromis niloticus), which is one of the two principal species used in West African fish culture and is native to the Volta River Basin. The improved strain will have better production characteristics (e.g. improved growth rates).

Source: FAO, 2010b Box 6.7 Kuttanad below-sea-level farming system In India, local people have transformed the swamps located below sea level, which form the Kuttanad Wetland, into cultivable, fishable and habitable lands. They have done this through the natural reclamation of flood deposits, sediments, sand, silts and the buried remains of timber of huge trees and natural litters. The Kuttanad agro- ecosystem can be categorized into three ecosystems: rice fields (Karapadam); wetlands (Kayal); and buried lands (Kari). The local communities have intelligently and prudently managed these three ecosystems through a farm system that supports a wide variety of plants (e.g. Oryza sativa, Cocos nucifera, Areca catechu, Mangifera indica, Artocarpus hirsuitus, Vigna unguiculata, Sesamun orientale, Musa paradisiaca, and some tuber crops), endemic fish, clams, mangroves and associated species. The rice fields are popularly known as Puncha Vayals, which traditionally favoured only rice cropping, now have turned into diversified cropping and rotational systems with inland and estuarine fish cultivation. The Kuttanad below-sea-level farming system has allowed the development of specific genetic resources that can grow in saline soils and then be conserved on-farm. The sustainable use of these resources and the knowledge that has been generated to manage them represent a local response to community needs that can help famers cope with the impact of climate change.

Source: GIAHS, 2013b