--- Department for International Development and International Development Research Centre.  The aim is to ---

485 MODULE 17: Capacity development for climate-smart agriculture Department for International Development and International Development Research Centre. The aim is to facilitate the flow of knowledge on climate change adaptation for sustainable livelihoods between researchers, policy makers, civil society organisations and vulnerable African communities. It uses the latest web-based applications, face-to-face interactions, and other media to share resources and promote learning. Online ser- vices are complemented by offline ones, such as an innovation fund offering small grants for new approaches to knowledge sharing; radio-based programming and dialogues in local languages; idea exchange workshops; and a dissemination service for network news and resources.

Box 17.8 illustrates how an information system can help connect farmers, extension services, the private sector, research institutes and NGOs and promote exchange for both for the improved adoption of existing technolo- gies, as well as for signalling demand for new technologies to technology developers and knowledge providers.

Box 17.8 TECA exchange Groups: technologies and practical advice for smallholders Context Technologies and practices for small agricultural producers (TECA) (available at http://teca.fao.org/) offers a well- managed IT-based information system for documenting and sharing applied technologies and practices of agriculture for small-scale farmers. FAO technical divisions, FAO partners and FAO projects document technologies and practices successfully applied by small producers, and then share them through TECA. Users can provide comments on featured technologies online. The global TECA platform can be used for information sharing in English, French and Spanish. It allows easy searches, even for rural users with low bandwidth. TECA modules can be provided for decentralized use and local adaptation as well (in local languages, for example).

Methodology The most recent, interactive version of TECA which hosts discussion groups has been running since 2009. There are currently two discussion groups, one with a regional focus (on Uganda) and one with a subject focus (beekeeping). An active group facilitator, one fully dedicated to the group, has been central to the success of both exchange groups. The role of the facilitator has been to increase awareness of the platform among potential users, bring individuals together and identify their common interests, initiate discussions, engage members to contribute, identify external experts or knowledge when needed, and provide technical assistance relating to the use of the platform. Another factor worth noting is that agricultural students are a very important and active group of participants; introducing them to experience- sharing with various rural actors via the internet platform is a great asset for their future work in agriculture.

Outcome Lessons from the piloting of TECA’s Uganda Exchange Group include:

Promoting the adoption of improved seed varieties through TECA’s Uganda Exchange Group In the Uganda Exchange Group, practitioners, experts, university students, local NGO staff, extension workers and other interested users engage in discussions about pressing issues, such as counterfeited agricultural inputs, difficulties with market access or diseases such as the cassava brown streak disease, but also exchange experiences of indigenous practices with smallholders in Uganda (FAO, 2010c). This way, relevant information and advice reaches those working in the field and ultimately small producers, enabling them to adapt better to the challenges they face.

For example, the use of quick-maturing and high-yielding seed varieties can help farmers adapt to changing weather patterns, shorter and more unpredictable rainfall. While locally adapted varieties were developed by research institutes, their multiplication and dissemination among farmers remains insufficient. This has been a re-occurring topic in the Uganda Exchange Group. In Uganda, new seed varieties developed by the National Agricultural Research Organization, one of TECA’s partners, are expected to be multiplied and disseminated through seed companies, i.e. the formal seed market. However, Ugandan agronomists estimate that 95 percent of seeds are supplied through informal channels. A detailed analysis of the situation unfolded in a discussion in TECA’s Uganda Exchange Group. Experiences of establishing self-sustaining informal seed systems for soybeans in six pilot districts were also shared. From this engaging exchange the vision for a novel approach emerged, combining formal and informal seed channels.

Knowledge exchange through TECA requires commitment This is only one example for how sharing information and good practices can promote knowledge-based intervention and policy to improve the livelihoods of smallholders. However, the example also alerts us to the challenges TECA faces. Following and engaging in discussions as a user of TECA or uploading technologies and practices as a partner of TECA requires time and skilled human resources. This commitment to TECA crucially hinges on the understanding that knowledge exchange and joint learning is a prerequisite for the successful application and scaling up of existing technologies and practices as well as the development of new technologies for small producers.