--- MODULE 5: Sound Management of Energy for CSA ---

145
MODULE 5: Sound Management of Energy for CSA
1.improve energy efficiency (measured in food output, preferably measured in nutritional units, per unit
energy input) at all stages of the agrifood chain;
2.use diverse energy sources with an emphasis on renewable energy and contribute to renewable energy
production through integrated food and renewable energy production; and
3.require improved access to modern energy services.

Bioenergy has a special role to play in relation to food security. Although biomass is often used in unsustain-
able ways, it is found almost everywhere and is currently, and for the foreseeable future, the most important
source of renewable energy. It is used primarily for cooking and heating. In addition, agrifood systems not only
use bioenergy, they also produce it. One instance is in integrated food-energy systems. However, putting bio-
energy to use in an appropriate manner is more complex than with other types of renewable energy. If it is not
well managed, bioenergy development may jeopardize food security and harm the environment. This is further
discussed in Box 5.3.
5.2 Energy-smart food in the CSA context
The energy sector, which produces nearly 60 percent of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, is the largest contribu-
tor to climate change (FAO, 2011a). The agrifood sector contributes over 20 percent of total GHG emissions,
most of which originates from methane and nitrous oxide (see Figure 5.3). Globally, primary farm and fishery
production3 accounts for around 20 percent of the total energy demand for food, but produces 67 percent of the
GHGs (FAO, 2011 a).
Figure 5.3
Shares of GHG emissions along the food supply chain with breakdown by energy
consumption (by phase) and GHG emissions (by phase and by gas).
Low-GDP countries
High-GDP countries
Global
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
~95
EJ/year
~50
EJ/year
~45
EJ/year
~9.7
Gt CO2eq/year
~3.3
Gt CO2eq/year
~6.4
Gt CO2eq/year
Carbon dioxide
Cropping
production
Methane CH
Livestock
production
Nitrous Oxide N
Fisheries
production
Processing
and distribution
Retail, preparation
and cooking

Source: FAO, 2011a
3 Primary production here includes cropping, pastoral and intensive livestock, aquaculture and fishing.