--- supply and protecting against soil erosion. The Participatory and Integrated Forest Fire Management Plan Project promotes ---

66 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case study 2.5 Addressing forest fires by improving livelihoods in the forest-agriculture interface in Syria ©FAO/Roberto Faidutti Farming woman with her cows on small holding Introduction The forest lands of Syria cover approximately 500 000 hectares, of which 232 000 are natural forest and 268 000 are plantations. Despite their relatively minor extent, the forests play a significant role in regulating water supply, controlling desertification, preventing soil erosion and flooding, and providing habitats for biodiversity. Because of high population pressures and resource use, the forests have become increasingly degraded, particularly by fire. Land tenure plays a large role in the process of land degradation. All forests have traditionally belonged to the state, with no access rights granted to the local population. As productivity of agricultural land has decreased due to erosion, and grazing resources are limited, forests have been illegally exploited and degraded. The key activities that have brought about forest degradation are burning to promote pasture inside the forest, overgrazing and the extraction of fuelwood. Key underlying drivers of forest degradation are the lack of legal access rights to resources and the limited number of viable livelihood options in the farming areas surrounding the forest.

More than timber harvesting, the forest provides economic benefits in the form of grazing land, fuelwood, and the harvest of non-timber forest products, such as mushrooms, wild herbs and medicinal plants. There is also increasing recognition among citizens and authorities alike that forests deliver valuable indirect economic benefits by safeguarding the water supply and protecting against soil erosion. The Participatory and Integrated Forest Fire Management Plan Project promotes more sustainable uses of the forest, including: controlled grazing; bee-keeping; harvesting of non-timber forest products; employment of local people in forest management activities, such as pruning; and ecotourism. Controlled grazing allows a stable source of feed for livestock and has the additional benefit of reducing fuel load in the forest near villages, which mitigates fire risks.

The landscape approach In Syria, there is a strong political will to support afforestation and other forestry activities. The main goal of the forestry policy, which has been committed to at high political levels, is to preserve the existing natural forest and establish new