--- The Convention on Biological Diversity defines ---

181 MODULE 6: Conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture Mobile systems usually provide pastoralists with the flexibility needed to adapt to changing climatic conditions and erratic and unpredictable availability of resources. Livestock trampling, browsing and seed dispersal, and the deposition of manure on grazing lands and along migration routes, help to maintain rangeland productiv- ity and biodiversity and make the grassland more resilient to changes. The removal or drastic reduction of grazing often results not only in lower long-term productivity, but also changes the landscape, which becomes dominated by shrubs.

In situ conservation The Convention on Biological Diversity defines in situ conservation as the maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural surroundings and, in the case of domesticated or cultivated species on- farm, in the surroundings where they have developed their distinctive properties. This definition encompasses two distinct concepts, namely in situ conservation sensu strict (in the strict sense), and on-farm conservation.

While in situ conservation primarily deals with wild species in natural habitats and ecosystems, on-farm con- servation deals with domesticated species in traditional farming systems. However both concepts are gener- ally referred to as in situ conservation. By managing organisms in their natural state or within their normal range, in situ conservation maintains both the population and the evolutionary processes that enable the popu- lation to adapt. In situ conservation of wild relatives is most commonly carried out by protecting the sites where important populations of the target species are present and designating these sites as genetic reserves.

Forest tree species are typically long-lived, highly genetically diverse organisms that have developed natural mechanisms (e.g. with huge capacity of dispersal of pollen and of seeds over wide areas) to maintain high lev- els of intraspecific variation. These mechanisms, combined with native environments that change considerably over time and across wide areas, have contributed to the evolution of forest tree species into some of the most genetically variable organisms on Earth. For forest species, the term circa situm (also “circa situ”) has been used to refer to conservation within altered agricultural landscapes (e.g. agroforestry systems, home gardens) outside the species’ natural habitat but within its native geographical range (FAO, 2013c).

Genetic resources for food and agriculture play an integral part in agricultural and food production systems.

The maintenance and evolution of these genetic resources strongly depend on continued human intervention and, in many cases, on traditional knowledge passed from generation to generation over centuries. Box 6.5 provides an example of how an ancient technique has allowed the conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources essential for food and nutrition security.

Box 6.5 Temperature regulation and soil fertility in the southern Peruvian Andes ©/GIAHS In the southern Peruvian Andes, over 4 000 metres above sea level, farmers cultivate several varieties of potatoes and other native crops, such as quinoa. They use “raised fields” locally known as waru-waru: a platform of soil surrounded by ditches filled with water. During the day, these water-filled trenches are warmed by sunlight. When temperatures drop at night, the water gives off the heat that protects the crops from frost. The system also helps maintain soil fertility. In the canals, silt, sediment, algae, and plant and animal residues decay into a nutrient-rich muck which can be dug out seasonally and added to the raised beds. This productive and inexpensive technique requires no modern tools or fertilizers. However, it is highly specialized and requires specific expertise and traditional knowledge that has been developed over centuries.

Source: GIAHS, 2013d