--- Page 278 ---

265 MODULE 10: Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture ozone depletion gases have significant global warming potential. The most perishable fresh products require transport methods (e.g. local trucks, live fish vessels and air transport) that emit higher levels of GHG. Cooled and frozen products require less time-critical transport methods (e.g. ship-borne reefer and freezer containers) that emit fewer GHGs. More stable products (dried, smoked and salted products), particularly those processed in artisanal supply chains, require methods for transport that are not time-sensitive and produce low levels of GHGs.

Overall, the ratios of GHG output per tonne of fish and aquatic foods at the production, distribution and retail stages are similar to those for other foods. GHG levels at first sale accounts for typically 25-40 percent of total outputs. However, these figures vary widely. Limited numbers of comparative assessments of CO2 equivalents per kilo across the different food production systems suggest that high fuel-use fisheries (e.g. poorly catching trawl or dredge fisheries) together with high-energy use post-harvest systems can be among the most GHG-intensive global food systems. Passive fishing gear systems or low-trophic level aquaculture (e.g. bivalves, seaweeds) can produce foods at lower GHG levels than most forms of meat or related animal protein production.4 Such systems have the potential to contribute to strategic shifts in consumption and to reductions in global GHG emissions.

The role of the sector in supporting the natural removal of emissions The highly significant role of the oceans and coastal margins in capturing and sequestering carbon is becoming increasingly understood and recognized. Around 93 percent of global carbon is estimated to be stored in aquatic systems and around 30 percent of annual emissions are estimated to be sequestrated in aquatic environments, primarily in mangroves, seagrasses, floodplain forests and coastal sediments (Nellemann et al., 2008). To im- prove the sector’s role in removing emissions, it is of primary importance to halt the disruption of carbon se- questration caused by habitat destruction and inadequate management of fisheries and aquaculture. Secondly, there may be valuable prospects for enhancing sequestration through expanding planted areas of mangroves and floodplain forests. Development of carbon funds to support GHG sequestration in the aquatic systems needs to ensure fisheries and aquaculture communities are properly represented and able to benefit from such funds.

There is also wider potential for exploring the role of aquaculture in carbon sequestration. Primary options include integrated multitrophic aquaculture (IMTA), where molluscs and seaweeds are grown as byproducts using waste inputs from more intensive aquaculture and systems where aquaculture cage or pond sediments are managed to enhance sequestration. These offer potentially valuable means of storing carbon. However, re- moving the carbon in longer-term conditions would require more secure means of disposal. This would involve either a biochar-type system or the disposal of carbon-enriched materials below oceanic thermoclines and into deep sediments. The physical and economic practicalities of this are yet to be demonstrated.

The role of the sector in providing alternative energy sources There are major technical and environmental interests in developing the potential of renewable aquatic energy.

This includes aquatic substrate biofuels and creating links to other aquatic-based energy systems that exploit the energy potential of tides, currents, waves, wind and hydropower. There are also options for physical inte- gration of aquatic-based energy systems with newly developing infrastructure such as offshore wind and wave installations. Currently, there is particular interest in algal biofuels, which are based on either microalgae that are typically cultivated in coastal ponds or intensive stirred tank systems or macroalgae (seaweeds) that is grown in conventional culture systems. Using microbial enzymes to produce fuels such as bioethanols and biodiesels is an already established practice, which is increasing in efficiency and yield. This is particularly the case with genetically engineered (GE) bacterial enzyme systems capable of digesting celluloses and in some cases providing direct conversion to biofuel. GE algae are also a possibility, but they would require more expen- sive containment and biosecurity systems. The costs of producing and harvesting algal raw materials are cur- rently too high to make production viable for any of the proposed systems and fuel routes. However as oil prices rise and production efficiencies improve, this procedure may become more viable. It should be noted that, as is the case for terrestrial biofuels, algal biofuels will provide an emission displacement function only and they will not lead to a net sequestration of carbon (more discussion on energy questions in Module 5 on energy). 4 See De Silva and Soto, 2009 for a comparative description of energy use in aquaculture systems.