--- 2010; Swanson and Rajalahti, 2010) ---

329 MODULE 12: Local institutions Today, the provision of agricultural research and extension services is spread across diverse public sector, civil society and private sector institutions. The similarities and differences in such a ‘menu’ of institutional options (Birner et al., 2009) are explored below.

Public sector institutions Crucial governmental actions that support CSA include: • the amendment and enforcement of related agricultural policies; • the distribution of incentivizing agricultural subsidies; • the provision of pertinent research and extension services; • the improvement of relevant infrastructure (e.g. building roads); and • the collection of national census data useful to CSA initiatives. (Reid et al., 2010; Swanson and Rajalahti, 2010) The institutional structures through which such assistance is delivered stretch from national ministries (pri- marily Ministries of Agriculture, although ministries with related purviews, such as Fisheries or Land, also play a role) to regional, subregional and local offices. Top-down in structure, the public sector is less likely to make use of bottom-up tools to formulate the needs of specific farmer groups. Civil society institutions are generally well-placed to foster bottom-up engagement.

Public spending on agricultural extension services is justified when the effects of the extension services bring benefits to more than the recipients of the trainings. In the case of CSA, such wide-reaching benefits are easily confirmed. Aside from contributing to the universal ‘public good’ of environmental sustainability, CSA increases food security because it improves adaptive capacity and resilience. Improved food security leads to poverty reduction and improved health, which in turn fuels economic development, which can ultimately bring about greater political stability (Anderson and Feder, 2003).

However, the peak of public investment in agricultural extension has now passed. The twentieth century saw no- table improvements in food security thanks to a heavy government emphasis on the transfer of new agricultural technologies to farmers. Following this success, public spending has decreased substantially. While there has been a corresponding rise of private investment, the long-term effects of decreased public involvement are sig- nificant. The prevalent extension systems tend to favour shorter-term, more localized, project-based approaches.

Given that CSA demands context-specific solutions, this tendency towards localized projects is appropriate.

However, there is a need to ensure wider coherence and long-term continuity across projects. National Adapta- Box 12.3 Sharing improved seasonal weather forecasting with farmers in West Africa Seasonal climate forecasts can considerably improve agricultural management and livelihoods for smallholder farmers (Hansen et al., 2011). Nevertheless, constraints related to the legitimacy, salience, availability, and understanding of these forecasts, as well as gaps in data and the limited capacity of farmers to respond appropriately, have so far limited the widespread use of seasonal predictions in the Sahel region. Moreover, better weather forecasts alone will not spur widespread uptake of climate-smart agricultural practices. Strengthened agricultural advisory and input supply services are required, as are improved marketing strategies, enhanced safety net policies to ensure food security, and similar provisions.

There is however potential for making improved weather information accessible to African farmers. For instance, regional climate outlook forums and national meteorological services have been working together to provide useful weather forecast information to rural farmers in both Mali and Senegal. Together with researchers and other stakeholders, farmers are being trained in the use of probabilistic seasonal forecasts. The changes they make as a result of this knowledge is being evaluated, as are the impacts these changes make to the farmers’ livelihoods.

Source: CCAFS and CGIAR, 2013a