--- Bates, B.C., Kundzewicz, Z.W., Wu, S. & Palutikof, J.P. ---

99 MODULE 3: Water management References Bates, B.C., Kundzewicz, Z.W., Wu, S. & Palutikof, J.P. 2008. Climate change and water. Technical paper of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, IPCC Secretariat. 210 pp.

Comprehensive Assessment. 2007. Water for food, water for life: the comprehensive assessment of water management in agriculture, D. Molden, ed. London, Earthscan and Colombo, International Water Management Institute.

FAO. 2007. Modernising irrigation management – the MASSCOTE approach. FAO irrigation and drainage paper No. 63. Rome.

FAO. 2011a. The state of the world’s land and water resources for food and agriculture (SOLAW) – managing sys- tems at risk. Rome, FAO and London, Earthscan.

FAO. 2011b. FAO-ADAPT. FAO’s framework programme on climate change adaptation. Rome.

FAO. 2012. Coping with water scarcity: an action framework for agriculture and food security. Water report No. 38. Rome.

FAO & National Drought Mitigation Center (NDMC). 2008. The Near East drought planning manual: guidelines for drought mitigation and preparedness planning. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Re- gional Office for the Near East, Cairo and University of Nebraska-Lincoln, National Drought Mitigation Center.

FAO & World Bank. 2012. Climate change adaptation in agricultural investment in East Asia and the Pacific: is- sues and options. Summary report of an Expert Group Meeting jointly organized by the World Bank and FAO.

Faurès, J.M., Bernardi, M. & Gommes, R. 2010. There is no such thing as an average: how farmers manage uncertainty related to climate and other factors. International Journal of Water Resources Development, 26: 4, 523—542.

Groves, D.G. 2006. New methods for identifying robust long-term water resources management strategies for California. Pardee RAND Graduate School (PRGS) Dissertation Series. Santa Monica, USA.

Gommes, R., Acunzo, M., Baas, S., Bernardi, M., Jost, S., Mukhala, E. & Ramasamy, S. 2010. Communication approaches in applied agrometeorology, In K. Stigter, ed. Applied Agrometeorology, pp. 263–287, Heidelberg, Springer.

High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition (HLPE). 2012. Climate change and food security. A report by the HLPE of the Committee on World Food Security, Rome.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2008. Climate Change and Water. B.C. Bates, Z.W.

Kundzewicz, S. Wu & J.P. Palutikof, eds. IPCC Technical Paper VI. Geneva, IPCC Secretariat. 210 p.

McGray, H., Hammil, A. & Bradley, R. 2007. Weathering the storm: options for framing adaptation and devel- opment. Washington, World Resources Institute. In OECD, 2009.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2009. Integrating climate change adapta- tion into development co-operation. Policy guidance.

Quni, L. 2011. Climate change impact assessment and adaptation in water resources and irrigated agriculture in 3H region of China. Presentation made at FAO-WB Expert Group meeting on climate change adaptation in agricultural investment in East Asia and the Pacific. FAO and World Bank.