--- Page 233 ---

220 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Grazing management Grazing can be optimized by balancing and adapting grazing pressures on land. This optimization can increase grassland productivity and deliver mitigation and adaptation benefits. However, the net influence of optimal grazing is variable and highly dependent on baseline grazing practices, plant species, soils and climatic condi- tions (Smith et al., 2008).

Perhaps the most clear-cut mitigation benefits arise from soil carbon sequestration that results when grazing pressure is reduced as a means of stopping land degradation or rehabilitating degraded lands (Conant and Paustian, 2002). In these cases, enteric emission intensities can also be lowered, because with less grazing pressure animals have a wider choice of forage, and tend to select more nutritious forage, which is associated with more rapid rates of live weight gain (LWG) (Rolfe, 2010). By restoring degraded grassland, these meas- ures can also enhance soil health and water retention, which increases the resilience of the grazing system to climate variability. However, if grazing pressure is reduced by simply reducing the number of animals, then total output per hectare may be lower, except in areas where baseline stocking rates are excessively high (Rolfe, 2010).

One of the main strategies for increasing the efficiency of grazing management is through rotational grazing, which can be adjusted to the frequency and timing of the livestock’s grazing needs and better matches these needs with the availability of pasture resources. Rotational grazing allows for the maintenance of forages at a relatively earlier growth stage. This enhances the quality and digestibility of the forage, improves the produc- tivity of the system and reduces CH4 emissions per unit of LWG (Eagle et al., 2012). Rotational grazing is more suited to managed pasture systems, where investment costs for fencing and watering points, additional labour and more intensive management are more likely to be recouped.

In colder climates, where animals are housed during cold periods, there are also opportunities for controlling the timing of grazing. For example, early grazing of summer pastures is a major cause of grassland degrada- tion in Northern China (see Case Study 8.1 for further information). Delaying grazing until the grass sprouts have reached a more advanced stage of maturity is an important sustainable grazing practice.

Finally, increasing livestock mobility, a traditional strategy of nomadic and transhumant herders in many parts of Africa for matching animal production needs with changing rangeland resources, can significantly enhance the resilience of these livestock systems to climate change. Land tenure reforms to deal with the encroachment of cultivated lands and other land uses that impede livestock mobility will be needed (Morton, 2007).

Pasture management and nutrition Pasture management measures involve the sowing of improved varieties of pasture, typically the replacement of native grasses with higher yielding and more digestible forages, including perennial fodders, pastures and legumes (Bentley et al., 2008). For example, in tropical grazing systems of Latin America, substantial improve- ments in soil carbon storage and farm productivity, as well as reductions in enteric emission intensities, are possible by replacing natural cerrado vegetation with deep-rooted pastures such as Brachiaria (Thornton and Herrero, 2010). However, there are far fewer opportunities for sowing improved pastures in arid and semi-arid grazing systems.

The intensification of pasture production though fertilization, cutting regimes and irrigation practices may also enhance productivity, soil carbon, pasture quality and animal performance. These approaches however, may not always reduce GHG emissions. Improved pasture quality through nitrogen fertilization may involve trade- offs between lower CH4 emissions and higher N2O emissions (Bannink et al., 2010). Also, after accounting for energy-related emissions and N2O emissions associated with irrigation, the net GHG emissions of this practice may be negative on grazing lands (Eagle et al., 2012). Grass quality can also be improved by chemical and/or mechanical treatments and ensiling.