--- production in Sub-Saharan Africa. ---

295
MODULE 11: Developing sustainable and inclusive food value chains for Climate-smart agriculture
It should be kept in mind that while reducing food losses and waste may be desirable from social and en-
vironment points of view, it may not always be economically desirable or feasible as the economic costs of
reduction may be higher than the production costs. An analysis of whether and how food losses and waste
can be sustainably reduced should take into account these three dimensions: economic, social and environ-
mental.
In order to identify opportunities to sustainably reduce food losses and waste along the chain, it is important
to understand the functioning of these chains, in particular how value which can then be captured by the chain
actors is increased.
Food losses and waste volumes
It is estimated that approximately 1.3 billion tonnes a year, which is roughly one-third of the food produced
globally for human consumption, is lost annually (FAO, 2011b). Fresh fruits and vegetables are among the
most lost and wasted food, due to their highly perishable nature (Parfitt et al., 2010). While similar amounts
are disposed of in both developed and developing countries (670 and 630 million tonnes respectively), the per
capita food loss in Europe and North-America (around 280-300 kilograms per year) is more than double that
of Sub-Saharan Africa and South/Southeast Asia (about 120-170 kilograms per year) (FAO, 2011b).
There are currently no published studies available related to the exact amount of food waste in developing
countries, where much less is wasted by consumers compared to developed countries. Various studies have
been undertaken at country level in developed countries, such as in the United Kingdom (Cathcart and Mur-
ray, 1939; Osner, 1982) with food waste estimations as high as 25 percent (WRAP, 2009). Similar figures were
found in other developed countries, around 15 percent in the United States (Kader, 2005) and Australia (Mor-
gan, 2009) and slightly lower numbers ranging from 8 to 11 percent in the Netherlands (Thőnissen, 2009). The
total amount of food wasted by consumers in industrialized countries is nearly as high as the total net food
production in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Causes of food losses and waste
In developing countries, food is mostly lost and wasted, because of the way food is:
• produced;
• handled after harvest;
• stored;
• preserved; and
• processed.

In addition, food is lost and wasted due to people’s lack of access to food, as a result of:
• insufficient income;
• lack of or limited markets; and
• lack of or inadequate infrastructure, such as roads, railways, waterways, port infrastructure.

In developed countries it is due to among others:
• how food is stored;
• prepared and cooked; and
• the food choices that people make (e.g. people buy more food than they need, put more food on their plates
than what they eat).

Figure 11.4 provides an overview of a simplified food value chain, where the causes of food losses and waste at
the various stages are identified, as are possible interventions by chain actors aimed at increasing efficiency,
sustainability and value addition. The various types of actors that are often involved at the different stages are
also introduced. Note that ‘distribution, transportation and packaging’, may be undertaken at several stages
within the chain, depending on the product. In addition, consumer behaviour can have a certain amount of in-
fluence on the whole chain, as the choices they make feed back into the production stages.