--- the leading British Fairtrade  company for hot beverages,  Cafédirect,  and the German Agency for International ---

336 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK institution, enabling a lively interaction among communities working on climate-smart agricultural activities all over the world. Box 12.10 illustrates an example of synergy at the international level in the coffee and tea industry.

Brokering partnerships Partnerships, such as joint public-private initiatives, needed to support and catalyse CSA involve diverse sets of actors with diverse goals, agendas and interests. Because of this, they entail high transaction costs and require a specific set of skills. Experience shows that brokerage functions are critical in facilitating such part- nerships (Clark et al., 2011). By definition, these brokers have to be good communicators, skilled at supporting interactive collaboration between different types of stakeholders. They must be proficient in helping people to acquire and share different kinds of knowledge. It is also critical that brokers be able to deal with large (and often hidden) asymmetries of power among actors. Successful cross-institutional interactions rely on clearly delineated and appropriately assigned responsibilities. This minimizes competition or duplication between individual entities in favour of harmonized efforts and shared outcomes (Young, 2002).

Depending on the local context and capacities, social capital and legitimacy, the brokering role can be played by local government, extension services, civil society organizations or national agricultural research systems (see Box 12.11).

Box 12.10 AdapCC: a climate-smart partnership for coffee and tea production The ‘Adaptation for Smallholders to Climate Change’ (AdapCC) initiative supports coffee and tea farmers in developing strategies to cope with the risks and impacts of climate change. The initiative is a public-private partnership by the leading British Fairtrade  company for hot beverages,  Cafédirect,  and the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ). Financing of the project is shared by Cafédirect (52 percent) and the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) Public-Private Partnership programme (48 percent).

Six pilot projects in Latin America (Mexico, Nicaragua and Peru) and in East Africa (Kenya, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania) were implemented between April 2007 and February 2010. In Nicaragua, the International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) projected a 2.3°C average temperature increase in certain municipalities by 2050 and 100 to 130 mm decreases in annual rainfall. It was predicted that there would be an overall loss of the coffee farming areas, coffee production would need to move to higher altitudes, and coffee quality would decline.

Based on a detailed Risk and Opportunity Assessment (ROA), the Nicaraguan pilot group, PROODECOOP (a coffee- growers’ organization), developed an action plan to manage the risks identified by adapting local production systems.

Some of the outcomes of the action plan are listed below. • A training process for 24 CAFENICA members on climate change and adaptation measures was conducted. (CAFENICA is an umbrella organization, grouping 12 coffee organizations including PRODECOOP. It represents over 6300 small-scale coffee growers.) • A small meteorological station to monitor rainfall and temperature was established. • Techniques and methodologies for the fabrication of agricultural organic inputs were validated. • More efficient water use and management techniques (drainage, storage and micro irrigation) were tested and implemented. • The experiences from the pilot were collected and systematized in order to be transferred to a wider range of coffee producers.

Following the successful implementation of its six pilot projects, the AdapCC partnership is now due to be scaled up in and beyond the original pilot countries.

Source: AdapCC, 2010