--- PNA members are: Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, ---

255 MODULE 10: Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture Box 10.5 Climate-smart tuna fishing in the western Pacific The industrial purse seine fisheries for skipjack and yellowfin tuna in the equatorial waters of the western Pacific Ocean make important contributions to global fish supplies. They are also vital to the economies of Pacific Island countries (PICs). The 1.3 million tonnes of tuna caught each year from the EEZs of PICs supply 25 percent of the world’s canned tuna. Licence fees from foreign fishing fleets contribute up to 10-40 percent of government revenue for several small island nations. Locally based tuna fishing vessels and canneries account for as much as 20 percent of the gross domestic product of some PICs.

The effects of the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) on the distribution and abundance of these species make it difficult to know when and where the benefits derived from these fisheries will be greatest. During La Niña events, tuna catches are highest in the western part of the region. During El Niño episodes, the best catches are made further east. To keep catches within sustainable bounds, and optimise distribution of economic benefits, the eight PICs where most of the tuna are caught control and distribute the fishing effort through the ‘vessel day scheme’ (VDS). These eight countries are known as the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA).

The exclusive economic zones of the PNA, which produce 25 percent of the world’s canned tuna.

PNA members are: Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu (PNA, 2013) The VDS sets a total allowable effort within PNA waters. This is allocated among the EEZs of PNA members, based on historical average patterns of fishing. Members are able to trade fishing days between themselves to accommodate situations where fish, and hence vessels, are unusually concentrated either in the west or east due to ENSO events.

The VDS is therefore similar to the ‘cap and trade’ schemes designed to limit emissions of carbon dioxide. The trading component aims to ensure that all PNA members continue to receive some level of benefits from the fishery, regardless of where tuna are concentrated.

The VDS not only deals with climatic variation, it has the flexibility to allow the fishery to adapt to climate change.

Allocation of vessel days to PNA members based on fishing effort history is adjusted regularly. As the projected redistribution of tuna to the east occurs under the changing climate, the periodic adjustment of allocated vessel days will reduce the need for members to trade fishing days.

Source: Bell et al., 2011