--- Page 405 ---

392 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Even where credit for agricultural investments is available, they generally do not support such long-term invest- ments. Restoration of degraded ecosystems can involve even longer periods before positive returns are gained, and involve very significant opportunity costs in the form of foregone income from the ecosystem during restora- tion. A classic example is restoration of degraded grazing lands which involves reduction (or even elimination) of grazing for extended periods. The table below, Table 14.5, is reproduced from and shows the number of years before a positive return to restoring grazing lands can be obtained for a pilot project in Qinghai, China.

Table 14.5 An example of opportunity costs of implementing improved grazing management practices Size of herd Baselinenet income NPV-HA over 20 years No of years to positive cash flow No of years to positive incremental net income compared to baseline net income ($/ha/yr) ($/ha) (number of years) (number of years) Small 14.42 118 5 10 Medium 25.21 191 1 4 Large 25.45 215 1 1 Source: McCarthy et al., 2011 The smallest producers face the longest wait for positive returns – implying the importance of long-term fi- nancing to food security and poverty reduction. The implications for public sector finance are to support credit/ safety net programmes that can maintain farm income levels over periods required for restoration.

Improving markets to reduce volatility is another key strategy to increase the resilience of agricultural pro- ducers to extreme events (FAO, 2012c). Recent experiences with food price spikes revealed the vulnerability of current food marketing systems to extreme events. Implications for national level agricultural investments are for improvements of both physical infrastructure (roads, storage, etc.) as well as regulations to support greater integration and stability of market processes (FAO, 2012c).

Increasing resource use efficiency Increasing resource use efficiency is a key component of sustainable agricultural intensification strategies (FAO, 2011c, also see Module 1). For example, the environmental strategies underlying sustainable crop in- tensification include maintaining healthy soil to enhance crop nutrition, using well-adapted, high-yielding va- rieties and good quality seeds, integrating management of insects, pests and diseases and efficiently carrying out water management (FAO, 2011c). These strategies are all means of increasing resource use efficiency.

They also have considerable potential to contribute to both adaptation and mitigation.

Resource use efficiency refers to a ratio between inputs and outputs (e.g. the amount of water or fertilizer uti- lized in producing a unit of agricultural output). TFP is a measure of resource use efficiency, and as argued in the first section of this module, increasing its importance as a source of agricultural growth is a fundamental principle for CSA. For example, increasing water use efficiency is a key adaptation strategy in areas where climate change is expected to reduce availability of water supplies (FAO, 2011b). Increased resource use ef- ficiency is also highly correlated with reduced emissions per unit produced (Thornton and Lipper, 2013).

What kinds of investments are needed to support farmers in increasing resource use efficiency? One key cat- egory of investment required is information. For example increasing water use efficiency requires mapping water demand and use over time and space and calculating where and when inputs are necessary. Similar in- formation is needed to increase fertilizer and pesticide efficiencies. This implies a need for investments in re- search as well as extension. While this need has been well recognized (FAO, 2011c) public sector investments have not been adequate, as discussed in the first section. Investments into development of technologies and