--- of the land. Between 2004 and 2012, the Participatory and Integrated Forest Fire Management Plan Project was conducted ---

67 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems plantations so that 15 percent of the country’s land area is covered by forest. Currently, forest covers only about 2.7 percent of the land. Between 2004 and 2012, the Participatory and Integrated Forest Fire Management Plan Project was conducted in four provinces, an area that included 50 percent of the country’s forest. The project was designed to address the key underlying drivers of forest degradation and create a greater awareness that forests cannot be managed in isolation from activities on adjacent land and in a manner that excludes local people. Only by enhancing the perceived value of the forest to local communities, and supporting livelihood options that do not encourage forest degradation, will forest management improve and fire regulation be possible.

The project worked on several different levels to build capacities to implement a participatory and integrated fire management plan for the Syrian forest-agriculture landscape. • National policy Policies, laws, regulations, strategic and management plans, operational practices and institutional capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reforms were reviewed. There was a particular focus on expanding the forest access rights of local communities. These rights were strenghtened in Forestry Legislation No. 25, adopted in 2007.

Through the project, community-based approaches were also recognized and incorporated into a national Integrated Forest Fire Management Strategy. The Strategy was developed by a multidisciplinary team with thorough consultation among different stakeholders, including numerous government agencies, local NGOs, (e.g. Peasants Union and the Womens Union) and academic institutions. As this strategy has been signed at the ministerial level, foresters are now mandated to take local communities into consideration and involve them in wild fire management. The Strategy can be considered as a substantial step forward for the protection of Syria’s forests and biodiversity. • Capacity development of central and decentralized authorities In the past, due to local communities’ lack of legal rights to forest resources, staff at the Forestry Department did not have a collaborative relationship with forest users. Technical forestry staff of the Forestry Directorate, as well as agricultural extension staff involved in project activities at central and provincial levels, required greater capacity for developing and implementing integrated management plans together with communities. In addition, the Forest Fire Management Units were provided with technology, training and institutional strengthening to better address both fire suppression and fire prevention. The establishment of a Fire Incident Management System was important for improving the technical execution and coordination of the different stakeholders involved in fire suppression activities.

Previously, fire suppression was disorganized and ineffective, and therefore dangerous. • Strengthening communities Starting in pilot areas, communities were given support to diversify their livelihood options, increase the empowerment of women and rehabilitate agricultural land. As mentioned above, suitable forest uses were encouraged. Organic agriculture was promoted to improve income through the production of high value crops, such as herbs and medicinal plants. Women were given training in activities that could generate income, including the marketing of handicrafts and the packaging of cash crops. First aid training was also provided, which was welcomed due to the lack of access to medical services, which are especially important during wild fires. Villagers were supported in gaining access to resources in order to create or modernise small enterprises (e.g. small businesses near tourist spots).

Lessons learned and recommendations By acknowledging the root causes of forest degradation and addressing these drivers in the forest-agriculture landscape in an integrated way, the project has been able to create a foundation for sustainable forest managment in Syria. At the same time, it has been able to contribute meeting CSA’s objectives. Fire was a problem due to deliberate burning in the forest and the negligence of fire control on agricultural land. By giving local communities a stake in the well-being of the forest, the fires could be prevented and not merely suppressed once the damage was already done. The project directly targeted local communities to improve their capacity for self-reliant economic development and independence. This was achieved through education, better access to health services and care, and creating greater awareness in the country of the importance of resource access rights, rural employment and the role of women as agents for development and social change.

Ongoing processes for reform as a result of the project include: the development of community-based watershed management programmes; the strengthening of land tenure laws; and additional institutional development.