--- This applies also to many climate-smart production strategies. As the HLPE Report on Climate Change and Food ---

456 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Enabling poor and food insecure communities to invest in CSA Agriculture is inherently risky, and may be even more so in the future with more extreme climate events. For poor farmers, adopting new technologies and production strategies may be beyond their tolerance for risk, given that failure may be catastrophic (FAO et al., 2012). It also often requires a certain investment, which – even if minimal – may be beyond their capacity. Kristjanson et al. (2012) found a strong negative relationship between household food security and innovation – in the sense that there is a correlation between the lack of innovation in farming practices and the number of food deficit months. Many poor households are simply unable to save sufficiently to invest in high-return strategies (Prowse and Scott, 2008).

This applies also to many climate-smart production strategies. As the HLPE Report on Climate Change and Food Security stresses, financial capital for investment in adaptation as well as human and social capital to implement adaptation are major obstacles for poor farmers (HLPE, 2012b). Many innovations that could make them more resilient, for example weather-index based insurance, are therefore difficult to access by those in greatest need.

If market failures in credit, insurance and other areas are not addressed, households will be limited in their ability to adapt to climate change – or manage any other risk (Davis, 2011).

Safety nets offer significant potential to meet these challenges, which is often underestimated, as they continue to be predominantly viewed as a last resort “when adaptation fails” (HLPE, 2012b) – certainly also because of misleading connotations with the term “safety net”. However, there is increasing recognition of the contribution of safety nets to building resilience, reducing risks and enhancing adaptive capacity among vulnerable communities.3 As Kristjanson et al. (2012) point out, some kinds of safety nets targeted at poor or vulnerable households, such as transfers of cash, vouchers, food, or other goods, may be needed before these households will be able to make any changes to their farming practices that will result in their being better adapted to changing circumstances.

Various empirical studies and impact evaluations have indeed shown that safety nets can spur economic growth among poor communities, which relates to the productivity element of CSA.4 The role of social protection and safety nets in making growth inclusive has placed them firmly in the discussions on sustainable development and on an “inclusive green economy” (see also Module 13 on policies). By providing a basic level of consumption below which people know they cannot fall, and by boosting a household’s asset base, resource transfers can allow poor farmers to invest further in education, health, skills development and productive assets. Predictable resource transfers can also precipitate savings and encourage prudent risk taking, technology adoption and entry into high- return strategies (Davis, 2011; Prowse and Scott, 2008). All of these are not only prerequisites for productive and sustainable livelihoods, but also critical elements of adaptive capacity and resilience (UN TT SDCC, 2011).

According to a recent meta-analysis of impact evaluations, public works programmes can have significant im- pact in terms of temporary employment creation and increases in participant’s current incomes (Kimmis et al., 2009). In addition, public works programmes that guarantee employment when needed, effectively provide insurance. Agriculture-related public works activities, such as hillside terracing or soil and water conserva- tion, can improve farm yields and generate sustainable benefits for household food security. They can also create community assets and infrastructure critical for adaptation. Studies of the long-term impacts of natu- ral resources management activities undertaken through food-for-work projects (in particular those that in- cluded terracing, agro-forestry and water capture and spreading) have found significant impacts in terms of increased crop yields as well as increases in vegetation diversity and cover. Furthermore, women benefited from the improved supply of water, fuel-wood, and other tree products (Reij et al., 2009). In many cases, such as with Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP), supported by WFP and others, public works pro- grammes have strengthened household resilience against recurrent drought-induced food insecurity (see Box 13.9 in Module 13 and Box 16.1 on PSNP below). There are, however, a number of challenges related to pro- moting sustainable natural resource management through public works programmes, as will be discussed in the section on challenges and lessons learned. 3 See, for example, The World Bank and IDS 2011 and Béné, 2012. 4 See, for example, Barrientos, 2012 and Alderman & Hoddinott, 2009.