--- Owensby, 2001). However, other negative ---

137 MODULE 4: Soils and their management for CSA Conventional practices Practices to enhance Productivity and Adaptation Practices to enhance mitigation Grazing systems:

Many extensive grazing systems are suffering from overgrazing and serious reductions in the biodiversity of the aboveground vegetation, due to the effects of declining availability of land and overstocking due to inadequate livestock management. This is resulting in a decline in the rangeland soil quality, with depletion of biomass, erosion of topsoil by water and wind, loss of SOC and reduction of ecosystem services. This results in losses of soil structure and resilience e.g. through loss of deep rooting species that can cycle nutrients and water from deep in the soil profile. Excessive trampling of livestock, in particular around watering points, further damages the soil structure and functioning. • Improved grazing management on pastures or rangelands may involve reducing stocking rates, avoiding grazing during drought periods, and improving the duration and timing of grazing and its frequency. This increases the soil surface protection by living and decomposing vegetation, increases SOC status and supports wider soil ecosystem services.

Applying fertilizer or other inputs can also increase annual net primary productivity. • Altering plant species’ composition is usually beneficial for pasture soils, as a selective increase in biodiversity can increase the quality (and usually the quantity) of SOC, consequently the range of rooting depths, thus promoting improved nutrient and water cycling. Introducing leguminous species is particularly beneficial to fix atmospheric N and improve soil fertility. • Rotational grazing through regularly moving livestock between paddocks intensifies grazing pressure for a relatively short period of time (e.g. 1 - 3 days for ultra-high stocking density or 3 - 14 days for typical rotational grazing), leaving a rest period for re-growth in between rotations. • Assisted natural regeneration, leaving land ungrazed for a period of up to several years to allow tree seeds already in the soil seed bank to become established brings multiple benefits to rangeland soils; improving nutrient cycling as nutrients are drawn from deep in the soil, increasing soil organic carbon (SOC) to the soil surface as leaves drop and decompose / become incorporated into the soil. Trees also offer some protection to soils (as well as to people and livestock) from periods of intense heat, which are likely to become more frequent due to climate change. • Fire management. Periodic burns can promote the overall health and growth of rangelands; for example, in tall grass prairie, increased plant productivity after it’s burnt more than compensates for the loss of plant carbon by ignition. Use of trees also increases production and adaptation.

Compared with more highly productive pasture, rangelands have low C sequestration rates on a per unit basis, but because of their vast area, they could capture 2 - 4 % of annual anthropogenic GHG emissions on a global basis (i.e. 20% of the CO2 released annually from global deforestation and land- use change) (Derner and Schuman, 2007; Follett and Reed, 2010). The majority of this C capture (greater than 90 percent) is in the form of SOC.

Fire management in rangelands is generally accepted to have a minimal to detrimental effect on GHG mitigation. Most studies found that SOC stays about the same or even decreases following repeated burns (Rice and Owensby, 2001). However, other negative co-effects (methane, smoke, aerosols) are also linked to climate change, making burning even less attractive as a GHG mitigation option.

Through soil C and above-ground C storage, silvopasture (trees planted on grazing land) may have GHG mitigation potential on up to 70 million hectares of grazing land (Nair and Nair, 2003). However, with few field research data, the estimated soil C sequestration rates of 0.5-3.6 tonnes of CO2 per hectare per year are largely based on expert opinions.

Compared with conservation activities on harvested croplands, the above activities on pasture yield higher soil C sequestration rates.

The difference is due to pastures’ greater allocation of plant biomass C to below-ground soil C and the extended growing season, reduced soil disturbance and better utilization of soil water. The range in sequestration rates depends on characteristics such as soil composition, topography, climate and existing grass species. The net fluxes of GHGs are also affected by nitrous oxide, or methane cycles (Conant et al., 2005).