--- Economic and Policy Innovations for Climate Smart Agriculture (EPIC) ---

359
MODULE 13: Mainstreaming CSA into National Policies and Programmes
to adapt to or mitigate the effects of climate change. A CSA practice will often contribute to both adaptation
and mitigation. For example, minimum tillage stores moisture and organic matter in the soil, which increases
adaptive capacity, and supports climate change mitigation by sequestering carbon. By following an integrated
approach, these practices increase long-term productivity, create synergies between adaptation and mitiga-
tion initiatives and reduce tradeoffs.
Sustainable intensification and productivity enhancement policies
Policies for intensifying sustainable production and enhancing productivity are vital for the development of
CSA. However, these policies need to be combined with broader landscape restoration measures. Included
in these measures are: improved technologies and innovations; the efficient use of land, water, energy and
other inputs; improved access to information and infrastructure; and efficient markets and risk management
tools (see also Module 2 on the landscape approach). Programmes that support reduced food loss and waste,
enhance value chains (see Module 11 on sustainable and inclusive food value chains), improve rural infrastruc-
ture and increase access to improved weather and climate services are also climate-smart. The challenge is
to tailor these policies to the national political situation and climatic context in a way that builds on existing
environmental strategies and ad-hoc programmes.
Box 13.2
Economic and Policy Innovations for Climate Smart Agriculture (EPIC)
Programme
The EPIC programme, housed in the Agricultural Development Economics Division of FAO, was initiated in 2011,
shortly after the CSA concept was introduced in preparation for the 2010 Hague Conference on agriculture, food
security and climate change. The programme is supported by the European Community to work with three partner
countries (Malawi, Zambia and Viet Nam), in developing CSA policies, strategies and investment proposals. The
programme supports work in five main areas:
• identifying and prioritizing locally viable CSA practices through the development of an evidence base on the food
security, adaptation and mitigation benefits of a range of feasible changes in agricultural technologies and practices;
• assessing barriers to adoption of CSA practices and identifying institutional and policy strategies to overcome them;
• analysing the impacts of climate risks on policy and investment priorities;
• strengthening country efforts to build a coherent and enabling policy environment for CSA implementation at the
country level and;
• building with country partners investment proposals for scaled up CSA activities that link to both agricultural and
climate financing sources.

Figure 1 gives an indication of the sequencing of these five building blocks of CSA implementation in country level.
Defining
coherent
policies
Identify barriers
and enabling
factors
Assessing
the
situation
Managing
Climate
Risk
Guiding
Investments