--- Centre (AfricaRice, previously WARDA) and the International Rice Research ---

300 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Good post-harvest handling and storage practices A variety of practices and technologies are available for reducing post-harvest losses related to post-harvest handling and storage. Good handling practices in order to avoid mechanical damages include ensuring that: • containers are not too full if they need to be stacked on top of each other; • containers are not dropped or thrown; • produce is not directly put on the soil, in particular soil with a high moisture content; • containers and field containers are clean; • the produce is not brought into contact with oil, gasoline or chemicals that should not be applied; • produce is largely kept in the shade to reduce the temperature of fresh produce; • produce is field packaged, which reduces costs by improving the speed of post-harvest handling and re- duces losses and waste (FAO, 1989) Other possible interventions to reduce food losses include: • immediate transportation after harvesting of crops, and landing in the case of fish; • using improved preservation and processing techniques including threshing and solar drying of produce; • using low cost and efficient storage and cooling structures; and • using practices, i.e. pasteurization and milk processing into cheese and yoghurt, to maintain product qual- ity and extend post-harvest life.

This section features two case studies, illustrated in Boxes 11.1 and 11.2, of improved post-harvest practices with regard to post-harvest processing.

The improved rice thresher cleaner (ASI) (see Box 11.1) is an affordable and locally constructed rice thresher which increases grain quality and therefore product value, which may ultimately lead to additional income for farmers. It also substantially reduces the amount of labour used and thus increases labour efficiency.

Box 11.1 An improved rice thresher cleaner (ASI) technology ©Marco Wopereis An ASI rice thresher is being used in Mali, AfricaRice http://www. africarice.org/publications/ricetoday/ The_little_machine_that_could.pdf A successful technology to reduce post-harvest rice losses is the improved rice thresher cleaner (ASI) which was introduced in the Senegal River Valley in 1997. The rice thresher was developed in collaboration between the Africa Rice Centre (AfricaRice, previously WARDA) and the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), which identified a prototype Asian rice thresher-cleaner.

National researchers from the Senegal River Valley National Development Agency (SAED) and the Senegalese Institute of Agricultural Research (ISRA) as well as with other partners including artisans, farmers, farmers’ organizations and an agricultural machinery factory then developed the first prototype of an improved rice thresher cleaner (ASI), which was commercially released in 1997. It is an affordable technology, which is locally constructed and accepted by farmers in rice-growing areas. Field surveys identified that post-harvest crop losses were estimated to be as high as 35 percent due to the inefficiency of manual threshing (Africa Rice Centre, 2005). As a result, grain is inefficiently separated or damaged, which leads to poor grain quality, lower marketable value or rejection of locally produced rice. The ASI is able to thresh six tonnes of rice per day, while manual threshing would produce only one tonne per day.

The grain-straw separation is 99 percent and no additional labour is needed for sifting and winnowing (Africa Rice Centre, 2005; Azouma et al., 2009). The ASI thresher has been widely adopted in Senegal as it improves the quality and marketability of rice and it increases productivity by relieving farmers from manual threshing, which is highly time consuming and labour intensive. It is estimated that currently more than half of total rice produced in Senegal is threshed with the ASI thresher and after using the thresher for 90 days the benefit cost ratio reaches 2.3 (Africa Rice Centre, 2005; World Bank, 2011). Through further modification and adaption to other countries it has been successfully transferred to other West African countries, including Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire (World Bank, 2011). In 2003 the ASI thresher won the special President of Senegal Prize for Science Research (Diagne et al., 2009).