--- Page 109 ---

96 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 3.8 Conditions for successful adaptation In developing countries, programmes designed to promote sustainable water management face the greatest number of barriers to the successful adoption of climate change adaptation practices. In most cases, the po- tential exists to adapt to climate change, improve the livelihood situation of rural communities and promote sustainable practices. Achieving these goals demands that a certain set of conditions be in place to remove constraints and build resilience and flexibility (FAO, 2011b), including: improvement of land tenure and se- cured access to water; strengthened and more collaborative land and water institutions; efficient support services (including knowledge exchange, adaptive research, rural finance); and changes in incentive frame- works that remove ineffective subsidies and focus on incentives that promote resilience, improve productivity and induce sustainable behaviours.

Climate change adaptation must be mainstreamed in both rural development and water scarcity programmes (FAO, 2011a; FAO, 2011b) and not carried out on a separate track. Water, land and food policies must be more aligned and viewed through the perspective of climate change. In particular, agriculture and rural develop- ment goals must be brought into water planning and take into consideration other water use sectors. Links must also be made with disaster risk management strategies, which are in a large part directly related to water management (see Module 15 on disaster risk reduction). 3.9 Water management for climate change mitigation Irrigated agriculture accounts for only 20 percent of the area of global agriculture, but is more intensively managed. On average, irrigated agriculture uses greater amounts of inorganic fertilizer and other agro- chemicals than most rainfed systems. Consequently, efforts to reduce greenhouse gases through improved crop management practices are likely to have more impact in irrigated lands than in rainfed areas.

Groundwater is used for irrigation on 38 percent of all irrigated land. The use of groundwater is expanding both in absolute and relative terms (Siebert et al., 2010), and this is increasing the use of fossil fuels and rais- ing the energy costs of water supply. At a regional level, energy consumption for groundwater irrigation can be significant. In China, energy consumption in this area is significant, accounting for 16–25 million tonnes of carbon emissions. In India, it is responsible for 4–6 percent of the national total emissions (Shah, 2009).

On balance, the options for direct climate change mitigation through irrigation are the same as those of agriculture as a whole. There is likely greater potential in areas of intensive groundwater irrigation. The pos- sibilities are governed mostly by the increased intensity of irrigation, which will allow for a greater potential for carbon sequestration in tropical conditions and greater productivity, but may be offset by more intensive use of inputs (Turral et al., 2011).

Agricultural methane (CH4) emissions account for more than 50 percent of CH4 emissions from hu- man activities. One-third of these emissions come from flooded rice production (28-44 teragrams of CH4 per year). More than 90 percent of global rice production is concentrated in the monsoon area of South and Southeastern Asia. Since the area of irrigated rice is growing relatively slowly, future increases in CH4 emissions from rice fields are expected to be small. Furthermore, rice fields are converted at least partially from natural wetlands, which also emit CH4, and extend over a much larger area at the global level. The effec- tive net emissions growth from transforming wetlands into irrigated rice has not been well studied. However when emissions from natural wetlands are taken into account, gross emission estimates are probably sub- stantially smaller than effective net emissions (HLPE, 2012).

Emissions during the growing season can be reduced by using various water management practices, such as cultivating aerobic rice and, where conditions allow, alternate wetting and drying. Avoiding water saturation when rice is not grown and shortening the duration of continuous flooding during the rice growing season are