--- Page 234 ---

221 MODULE 8: Climate-smart Livestock With increasing variability in climatic conditions (e.g. increasing incidents of drought) due to climate change, there may be an increase in the frequency of periods where forage availability falls short of animal demands.

In these situations, supplemental feeding can be an important adaptation strategy.

Animal breeding Animal breeding to select more productive animals is another strategy to enhance productivity and thereby lower CH4 emission intensities. Research has recently been done on the mitigation benefits of using residual feed intake as a selection tool for low CH4 emitting animals, but so far findings have been inconclusive (Wag- horn and Hegarty, 2011).

There is also evidence that cross-breeding programmes can deliver simultaneous adaptation, food security and mitigation benefits. For example, composite cattle breeds developed in recent decades in tropical grass- lands of northern Australia have demonstrated greater heat tolerance, disease resistance, fitness and re- productive traits compared with pure shorthorn breeds that had previously dominated these harsh regions (Bentley et al., 2008). In general, cross-breeding strategies that make use of locally adapted breeds, which are not only tolerant to heat and poor nutrition, but also to parasites and diseases (Hoffmann, 2008), may become more common with climate change.

Adaptation to climate change can also be fostered through the switching of livestock species. For example, the Samburu of northern Kenya, a traditionally cattle-keeping people, adopted camels as part of their livelihood strategy. This switch allowed them to overcome a decline in their cattle economy, which, from 1960 onwards, had been affected by drought, cattle raiding and animal disease (Sperling, 1987).

Animal and herd management, disease control and feeding strategies As with all livestock production systems, there are a number of animal and herd management options for land- based systems that can enhance animal productivity, improve feed conversion efficiency and thereby reduce enteric emission intensities. Better nutrition, improved animal husbandry, the regular maintenance of animal health and the responsible use of antibiotics can improve reproduction rates, reduce mortality and reduce the slaughter age. All of these measures will therefore increase the amount of output produced for a given level of emissions. The impacts of these measures on adaptation are likely to be neutral.

In addition to enhanced animal health management to maintain and improve animal performance, the man- agement of disease risks may also become increasingly important, as there may be an increase in the emer- gence of gastro-intestinal parasites due to climate change (Wall and Morgan, 2009). Breeding more disease- resilient animals is one approach to addressing this issue.

Vaccines Because of their wide applicability, even for very low-input extensive systems with little human intervention, vaccines against methanogens (microorganisms that produce methane as a metabolic by-product in low-ox- ygen conditions) in the rumen are a potentially useful mitigation option for ruminants in land-based grazing systems. However, more research and development is needed before this option is ready for widespread adop- tion (Wright and Klieve, 2011).

Early warning systems and insurance The use of weather information to assist rural communities in managing the risks associated with rainfall variability is a potentially effective (preventative) option for climate change adaptation. However, there are is- sues related to the effectiveness of climate forecasts for livestock management that still need to be addressed (Hellmuth et al., 2007). Livestock insurance schemes that are weather-indexed (i.e. policy holders are paid in response to ‘trigger events’ such as abnormal rainfall or high local animal mortality rates) may also be effec- tive where preventative measures fail (Skees and Enkh-Amgala, 2002). There may be limits however to what private insurance markets can do for large vulnerable populations facing covariate risks linked to climate change (UNDP, 2008). In situations where risks are unacceptably high for the private sector, recently devel-