--- Participatory rangeland management in the Syrian Arab Republic ---

23 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries Increasing diversity in the field Increasing diversity of production at farm and landscape level is an important way to improve the resilience of agricultural systems (FAO, 2010a; FAO and OECD, 2012; HLPE, 2012a).

Specialized systems are often presented as being more efficient from an economic point of view, as they gener- ate more income. These systems can benefit from the improved technologies and from economies of scale in the production and distribution of inputs, machines, and especially processing and trade.

Diversifying production can also improve efficiency in the use of land, as is the case in agroforestry systems for instance and of nutrients with the introduction of legumes in the rotation or in integrated crop/livestock or rice/aquaculture systems. Studies show that they can also be more efficient in terms of income (see for in- stance Box 1.6), especially if this is measured as an average over a period of several years. The Finnish project ADACAPA aims to identify means for assessing and enhancing the adaptive capacity of the Finnish agricultural sector to global environmental and socio-economic changes at various decision-making levels (farm, regional, national). The main hypothesis tested is that increasing diversity enhances resilience and thus adaptive capac- ity of agrifood systems. Some of the results of studies conducted in the ADACAPA project have shown that di- versity can increase income (Kahiluoto, 2012). Farms that both grow crops and exploit forest generate a higher and more stable income. Regions growing more diverse varieties of barley have a higher average yield than areas growing a single variety. More diversified systems can also spur the development of local markets. An example of this is agroforestry in Central America (Box 1.6). Finally, systems providing more diverse types of food are also more efficient from a nutritional point of view as they facilitate more balanced and diverse diets.

Trade Agriculture is a classical example that illustrates the role of trade to increase global economic efficiency by exploiting local comparative advantages (Huang et al., 2011). This is, however, being questioned from a GHG emissions perspective, initially triggered by the promoters of the ‘food miles’ concept who advocate the con- sumption of local products to reduce GHG emissions. In reality, transport represents only a small part of global food systems’ emissions. Emissions from transport are estimated to be 11 percent, of which 6 percent results from consumers’ transport to buy food (Weber and Matthews, 2008). Obviously, these percentages will vary by distance and the agriculture/food product considered. Life cycle analysis of various products confirms that, apart from fresh fragile products, such as fish, fruits and vegetables, transport is not the determining factor of their carbon footprint (FAO, 2012c). In fact, a more efficient production system can more than compensate for the emissions resulting from transport. The emissions due to transport to retailers should not be isolated Box 1.7 Participatory rangeland management in the Syrian Arab Republic In the Syrian steppe (or Badia), IFAD is working on participatory rangeland management with local communities to reduce herders’ vulnerability to climate change and restore the long-term productivity of rangelands. After years of severe drought and intensive grazing, rangelands in the Badia were severely degraded.

By reintroducing native plants that help meet fodder requirements, fix the soil and stop sand encroachment, ecosystems were restored and the local population’s vulnerability to the effects of climatic instability was reduced.

After two years of resting, reseeding and planting, birds, insects and animals returned to the area. The rehabilitated ecosystems offered further potential for income generation, as truffles grow in some areas of the Badia, and women could gather them to boost their family incomes. In 2010, a community with a 100 000-ha grazing area could earn up to USD1 million through the sale of truffles.

Higher household incomes provided a basis for the project to diversify income-earning opportunities for women through literacy classes and training courses in new skills such as first aid, food processing and sewing. With households being better off, there is less pressure on young girls to marry early, and as women gain more economic autonomy, they are finding that gender relations are shifting.

Source: IFAD, 2012a