--- Page 173 ---

160 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Important opportunities for reducing energy dependency can be found in the drying, conditioning and storing of produce and in improving the fuel efficiency of field machinery. For grain drying, modern continuous flow dry- ers can be operated with much lower levels of energy than conventional dryers. Reduced energy use can also be achieved through the insulation of dryers, the recirculation of heat recovery of out-going air and improved instrumentation and automatic control. Combined (warm and cold air) dryers further reduce heat demand, but require a continuous and reliable electricity source for fans. Also available is dielectric heating technology, which can significantly reduce the energy needed for processing agricultural products. Typical rates of 600- 750 kilojoule per kilogram (kJ/kg) of dried grain are needed to store products with 14 percent moisture, with liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and electricity as the principal energizers. This rate goes up to 3-6 GJ/ha for corn (Smil, 2008).

Solar power (photovoltaic or solar heaters), wind and geothermal energy are all sources of energy that are available today for both large and small applications. They are particularly suitable for remote rural areas.

Worldwide, the use of biomass for heat and power could save significant amounts of carbon.

However, the bioenergy would have to be carbon neutral, and there is debate as to whether this would be the case (see Box 5.3). Co-firing of biomass with coal could save nearly 0.5 gigatonne of carbon (GtC) per year at fairly modest costs (FAO, 2010). Savings in the traditional biomass and charcoal sectors could amount to an- other 0.5 GtC. Considerable efforts would be required in this sector to address the higher investments involved, the complex socio-economic and cultural issues, and the transaction costs associated with equipment and the reliable supply of biomass (FAO, 2010).

Examples of progress being made to realize the transformation towards energy-smart food include:

Behind the farm gate: • Significant improvement in energy efficiency has been made through precision farming in industrial agri- culture and through conservation agriculture. • Renewable energy has been used on farms. The increased use of solar pumps in irrigation systems is one example. In addition, bioenergy is being used in integrated food-energy systems (Bogdanski, 2012). Exam- ples include: biogas in integrated crop-livestock systems, particularly in Asia; intercropping with peren- nials such as pigeon peas to produce wood for on-farm energy purposes in Africa (Bogdanski and Roth, 2012); and more complex food-energy systems, such as the Tosoly farm in Colombia (see Box 5.4). Another example can be found in the use of suspended solar panels in agrophotovoltaic systems (see Box 5.5).

Beyond the farm gate (see also Module 11 on post-harvest management and food chains): • Renewable energy is also being used in food processing activities. For example, in Sri Lanka woody bio- mass is used to dry spices. This innovation has diversified income streams and has increased revenue for a range of local operators in the spice market chain. In addition to selling by-product fuel wood from pepper plants to the dryer operators, small-scale growers are now able to sell mature spices that can be dried and preserved (FAO, 2009). • The United Kingdom’s ‘war on food waste,’ ‘waste implementation programmes’ (UK DEFRA, 2003) and similar initiatives have improved the energy efficiency in agrifood systems by reducing food losses. • The promotion of clean cooking stoves in many parts of the world has made food preparation more energy efficient and healthy.