--- tenure rights in the Maya Biosphere Reserve, Guatemala ---

64 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case study 2.4 Preserving forest resources and improving livelihoods through communal tenure rights in the Maya Biosphere Reserve, Guatemala Introduction Before 1990, the largest economy in Guatemala’s Petén state was the extraction of latex (the raw material for the manufacture of chewing gum) from the sapodilla tree (Manilkara zapota) and logging of precious wood (cedar and mahogany). The timber industry had unique access to the forested areas.

In 1990, the government created the Maya Biosphere Reserve, which at 2.1 million hectares covers over 50 percent of Petén state. Connected with other protected areas in Belize and Mexico, the Maya Biosphere Reserve is one of the largest areas of tropical forest north of the Amazon. The Reserve is divided into three types of zones with different levels of protection, according to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) criteria for the Biosphere Reserve Model. It has three core areas of state-owned national parks and wildlife reserves, which are restricted from harvest activities. One of these areas, the Tikal World Heritage site, now brings many national and international tourists each year and generates significant revenues to the state. Multiple-use zones under state ownership are dedicated to regulated harvest of zate palms, chicle gum, allspice and timber. A less regulated buffer zone covering privately owned land has been rapidly changing from a forested landscape with scattered agricultural patches to an agricultural landscape with an increasingly fragmented forest.

The landscape approach Before the creation of the Biosphere Reserve, logging companies operating under concessions for selective harvesting of timber and aggressive colonization programmes, neither of which had proper management plans and safeguards, were causing severe degradation of the tropical forest ecosystem. With the establishment of the Maya Biosphere Reserve, these activities were suspended, pending the development of a Master Plan, and rules and regulations for the use and management of natural resources.

The early management phase of the multiple-use zones was complicated and conflicted. The logging industry was reluctant to lose its exclusive rights to the land, and local communities fought hard to prove their management capacity and gain secure tenure rights. A long-term model had to be found that could both improve local production systems and, at the same time, guarantee the protection and sustainable management of the natural resources. Even though the creation of the Biosphere Reserve and the Master Plan, which was approved in 1992, paved the way for the allowance of concessions to communities, the process remained difficult. The first community concession was granted in 1994. This cleared the way for other concessions and presented a new alternative of communitarian development. The allocation of management rights to land-use stakeholders was based on renewable 25 year contracts. The ownership of the forest land within these models remains with the government, while communities are given management rights.

The communities that lie within the 800 000 hectare multiple-use zones have the possibility to sustainably harvest wood and non-timber forest products. However, to do so, community operations are required by law to be certified (the Forest Stewardship Council system has been widely used) and retain the certification throughout the duration of the contract, proving that they are managing the forests to conserve the integrity of the ecosystem. Currently, 13 forest concessions covering 500 000 hectares have been granted to local communities, which are organized under different legal configurations depending on their interests and type of technical support. Two concessions have been granted to the forestry industry.

This system of community forest concessions is unique in the world. It has enhanced the interest of forest resource users to protect and manage the forest; led to better forest governance; created jobs; increased income from non-timber forest products; and generated training and technical and organizational revenues. This has encouraged the concession holders to act as protectors of the forest. By shifting the emphasis on wood products to a combined valuation of timber and non- timber products and services, the system strengthens the links between forest ecosystem services and the needs and livelihood strategies of the people.