--- Source: World Bank, 2011a ---

358 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK National CSA policies are affected by developments at the international level, particularly in terms global agreements and mechanisms to support climate change adaptation and mitigation. Despite the current limited recognition of agriculture in the major global climate financing mechanisms, the interest in agriculture in the international climate change policy forums has been increasing (FAO, 2012b).

The lack of progress on agriculture within the UNFCCC context contrasts with the growing concern and inter- est many developing countries have shown for the implementation of agriculture adaptation and mitigation actions. Their interest is focused on how these actions might best be taken within subnational contexts and through nationally-owned policies and strategies. The national interest to pursue CSA provides an opportu- nity for shaping both domestic policies and international instruments for meeting the challenges of ensuring global food security and addressing climate change (FAO, 2012b).

CSA’s public good element CSA provides public goods (e.g. erosion control measures in an upper watershed may help to control flooding in a lower watershed; or control of field nutrient run-off will help maintain adequate water downstream), and for this reason public support is justified.2 CSA may also have negative consequences (e.g. when an individual, firm, or country takes an action but does not receive all its benefits or bear all costs) or deliver benefits in other areas. CSA may also generate private goods. Most CSA options either bring both environmental and economic benefits (e.g. improved water use efficiency, enhanced fertility, enhanced resilience to drought) or reduce negative externalities (e.g floods, pollution, GHG emissions, soil erosion, deforestation) and generate non-market public goods (e.g. climate resilience, enriched soil with carbon).

At a general level, the key challenge is to alter policies and remove public subsidies that act as disincentives for adopting CSA, and reallocate resources to programmes that provide incentives for the adoption of CSA prac- tices. Policymakers have a set of tools and instruments (e.g. rural credit programmes, input and output pricing policies, including subsidies, support for investments with public good benefits, property rights, research and extension services as well as safety net programs) that they can apply to change the incentives and build the capacity of farmers to modify their production systems (FAO, 2012b).

A guiding FAO principle with respect to CSA is the ‘no-regrets’ approach. It emphasizes measures that should be taken even in the absence of climate change because they improve the efficiency of agricultural, forestry and fishery practices. At the same time, these measures put farmers, foresters or fishers in a better position 2 A good with benefits for the broader economy and society, or which generate benefits in a different location from where the activ- ity takes place Box 13.1 Brazil: four decades of focusing support on public goods In Brazil, the overall level of public support to agriculture is less than 6 percent of agricultural gross domestic product (GDP), compared with 25 percent in OECD countries and 18 percent in India. However, public support has focused on public goods, including funding research in crops, livestock breeds and farm systems that adapted to Brazil’s tropical ecosystems, and investments in enriching soil fertility. Over half of Brazil’s soybean crop is now farmed using conservation tillage. There has also been support for mixed crop and livestock systems, and rotating pastures with crops to supplying additional nutrients. In its lending conditions, the Brazilian National Development Bank (BDNES) now includes criteria for sustainable land, water and forest management. Brazil has also launched programmes on agricultural water management and rural development that are targeted to the specific conditions in each region of the country. In the north east, for example, sustainable land, water and nutrient management is a priority of the regional programme; in the south, the focus is on livelihoods; and in the western Amazon, forest management is emphasized. It has been a leader in piloting the use of renewable resources for fuel, including ethanol from sugar, and the sustainable cultivation of charcoal for iron production. In the last decade, Brazil has made impressive progress in reducing deforestation.

Source: World Bank, 2011a