--- Source: Lipper and Oosterveer, 2011 ---

335 MODULE 12: Local institutions Informal, social and cultural institutions As mentioned earlier, institutions are not only formal organizations. Informal arrangements, common prac- tices, habits and spoken or unspoken agreements all constitute ‘institutions’. They also shape how things are done in a community and influence if and how new practices are adopted. The term ‘culture’, signifying ‘the distinctive ideas, customs, social behaviour, products, or way of life of a particular nation, society, people, or period’ (Oxford English Dictionary) is often used to broadly describe these informal institutions.

Initiatives, such as CSA, which demand changes in practices and habits, often have cultural implications (see Box 12.14) that create barriers to adoption. Implementing change is most successful if the informal, social and cultural arrangements in place are understood, and activities and actions are channelled through the ap- propriate institutions, including faith groups, women’s groups, ethnic communities or traditional leadership hierarchies. These institutions can be powerful allies for development projects at the community level and can bring local knowledge, social legitimacy and established networks to CSA programmes. As many rural people prefer to undertake collective, rather than individual actions, the importance of local, typically small, groups for CSA activities should not be underestimated. These collective actions may include tree planting, tree nurs- eries, water storage and management (e.g. irrigation), and soil improvement (e.g. terracing) (Meinzen-Dick et al., 2010; Place et al., 2004). 12.3 Building synergies To facilitate interaction and communication between many individual institutional actors (e.g. agricultural pro- ducers, traders, community and agricultural producer groups, government agencies, and private food sector actors), a conducive environment needs to be created. Actors need a place where they can articulate demands, share lessons and promising solutions, and create the ‘pull’ that elicits innovation (Clark et al., 2011). This ‘institutional interplay’ should not only be ‘horizontal’, taking place on the same organizational level, but also integrate institutions ‘vertically’, incorporating perspectives across traditional levels and hierarchies (Young, 2002; Lebel, 2005). The scale (national, regional, district, or village) of such efforts depends on the problem being addressed, its coordination requirements, and the structures of the value chains involved.

This section considers key requirements for setting up such ‘safe spaces’ or platforms for institutional learn- ing and innovation. These include capable partnership brokers as well as careful consideration of equity is- sues and cultural institutions. On this basis, networks and CSA platforms are emerging as a kind of ‘umbrella’ Box 12.9 Informal seed systems A key example of an informal institutional arrangement is ‘informal seed systems’ , which includes all non-certified seed sources (primarily farmers’ own seed, saved from previous crops, but also seed obtained in exchanges through social networks or at rural markets). Most farmers in developing countries access the seeds they plant through the informal seed system. Seeds are cheap and easy to access in this way, which makes the informal seed system popular.

In traditional systems of seed exchange, the social principles of trust and reciprocity usually serve as an assurance of quality. In general, these networks are confined to a very local level, with little interchange with outside sources.

This limited opportunity for exchange and a lack of scientific information about the quality and genetic content of the varieties being exchanged make it difficult for farmers to select appropriate seeds. Climate change is likely to affect the geographic suitability of crop varieties. For this reason local markets should be used to communicate and collect relevant information about changing conditions and feed climate-resilient varieties into the informal system, where seed exchange continues beyond the market between families and neighbours. Further initiatives to help spread CSA through informal networks include local seed and genetic diversity fairs, alternative labelling systems (e.g. quality declared seed or farmer-based labelling schemes) and training of traders.

Source: Lipper and Oosterveer, 2011