--- Page 513 ---

500 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK combined with future climate projections to infer associated potential impacts on agriculture. Vulnerability is then characterized accordingly (this will be elaborated below). Baseline projections are established based on the results of climate impact assessments.

In addition, it is necessary to assess which changes in agricultural and commercial practices and in the institu- tional and policy environment are effective and efficient measures to achieve the CSA objectives of adaptation, mitigation, food security and development (CSA options assessment). CSA options assessments are typically conducted at the programme or project’s preparation stage (Figure 18.1) and aid planners in setting project and programme baselines. CSA options for implementation are identified based on the assessments (elabo- rated further below).

Effective adaptation options can be explored based on historical, current and projected climatic impacts on agriculture and the vulnerability of livelihoods and food security. It is also possible to simulate the adaptation activity that is more suitable for adapting to a changing climate. Mitigating climate change can be achieved in two main ways: reducing emissions of GHGs and sequestering carbon in the biomass and the soil. Assessing the mitigation potential of project interventions is important for ensuring that there are no tradeoffs with ad- aptation actions. On a national scale, it is also important to monitor and assess the impact of carbon seques- tration for addressing international agreements on climate change mitigation. CSA activities should also meet broader food security and development goals (see also Module 1 on rationale of CSA).

After assessing CSA options against all three CSA objectives, the best interventions would be those that pro- mote synergies between adaptation and mitigation without compromising food security and development goals. Stakeholders are invited to review the findings of the assessment. Ideally, options that address as many CSA objectives as possible should be prioritized.

Assessments for policy and project design are initiated before the interventions are undertaken, and some of them continue throughout the project cycle. They can be climatic, biophysical and socio-economic.

Climate impact assessment Climate impact assessments specify the changes in climate in a historic, current or future context, and estab- lish evidence-based relationships between climate and productivity in the agriculture, forestry and fishery sec- tors. Climate impact assessments indicate the vulnerability of different stakeholders to a changing climate and the potential impacts of climate change on agriculture. Stakeholders targeted by vulnerability assessments include male and female smallholder farmers, landless labourers, commercial farmers and people working in the value chain. Table 18.2 gives examples of outputs from climate impact assessments.

Table 18.2 Examples of outputs from climate impact assessments of changing climate, climate impacts on agriculture and vulnerability • Rainfall pattern, amount and area; • Seasonality of climate (e.g. timing of monsoon, rainy and dry seasons); • Water availability for rainfed and irrigated agriculture; • Temperature (e.g. daytime maximum, night time minimum); • Evapotranspiration; • Frequency and intensity of extreme temperature events (cold spells, heat waves); • Frequency, intensity, and duration of droughts and floods; • Soil erosion and soil nutrient cycle; • Snow cover; • Pests and diseases impacted by climate; • Changes in crop yields due to changes in climate (e.g. higher temperatures and reduced rainfall); • Changes in market price of major commodities due to climatic factors, including climate-related disasters, such as droughts, floods and storms;