--- The World Bank’s Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) has developed a web tool called ---

148 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK It is essential to consider affordability and cultural issues when deploying new or improved energy technolo- gies. Domestic stoves account for a major part of energy consumption in the food chain, especially in develop- ing countries. The dissemination of improved designs of domestic stoves succeeds mainly when micro-finance is available for the necessary capital investments. Traditional biomass cooking stoves may be less energy- efficient, less healthy and more labour-intensive than solar or biogas designs, but they are often more af- fordable, which is a critical factor for impoverished rural communities (Geoghegan et al., 2008; UNDP, 2009).

New stove designs also need to be culturally acceptable. Compared with open fires, the use of more efficient biomass cooking stoves can reduce by half the demand for traditional fuelwood (Chum et al., 2011). However, not all programmes to introduce these more efficient stoves have succeeded. This lack of success is often due to the informal nature of the fuelwood supply chain and a poor understanding of local cultures and their cook- ing habits. For example, users may prefer to cook with fuelwood during the cooler evenings rather than cook in the heat of the day with a solar oven.

CSA objective: strengthened resilience to climate change and variability As a result of climate change, some farming practices may become less reliable as sources of income. For some farmers diversification to on-farm energy generation could be a coping strategy. With high and volatile fossil fuel prices, energy-smart food systems which improve access to modern energy services and increase energy diversity, contribute to energy security. This is not a climate change adaptation strategy, but it strength- ens resilience, which is the broader term used in the definition of CSA. Reliance on local energy sources does not automatically enhance resilience to climate change (see Table 5.1). Tapping into local energy sources can increase incomes and expand the diversity of energy sources. This increases resilience to climate change. The use of biogas cookstoves illustrates both types of adaptation. Biogas cookstoves and their liquid fertilizer by- product can help ensure self reliance in household energy and at the same time they can reduce the amount spent on woodfuel and chemical fertilizers, as well as make gathering firewood less time consuming.

Although renewable energy plays a key role in future low-carbon plans aimed at limiting global warming, its dependence on climate conditions also makes it susceptible to climate change. This is also true for energy- smart food systems. For example, climate change will affect many aspects of renewable energy production, including: the cultivation of biofuel crops; water availability and seasonality for hydropower; atmospheric con- ditions for wind and solar energy; and variations in needs of energy for heating and cooling. As these impacts will increase significantly, the energy sector will have to adapt. The energy supply needs to be ‘climate-proofed’ as much as possible to ensure that energy use in the agrifood system can be climate-smart. Table 5.1 presents examples of adaptation measures to reduce climate change-related losses and risks in the energy sector.

Several of these measures are similar to those promoted for climate change adaptation in agriculture and are relevant to CSA. Furthermore, while the table shows adaptation measures for individual energy classes, it should be noted that a diverse energy portfolio could be a way to reduce climate risk to energy supply.

The World Bank’s Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) has developed a web tool called the Hands-on Energy Adaptation toolkit (HEAT) to assess the vulnerability of the energy sector to climate change and other factors (ESMAP, 2013).