--- Page 211 ---

198 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK part of the Save and Grow paradigm. These relationships and other elements of the production system are largely covered in other modules (see for example Module 1 on general principles of climate-smart agricul- ture, Module 3 on water management, Module 4 on soil management, Module 5 on energy systems, Module 6 on genetic resources and Module 8 on livestock and crop-livestock systems).

As climate changes, the resilience and adaptive capacity of agricultural production systems and agricultural landscapes will become more important (see Module 2 on climate-smart landscapes and production sys- tems). To become more resilient and better able to adapt to changing conditions, crop production systems will need to rely more on ecological processes that produce positive feedbacks on sustainability and produc- tion and ensure improved provision of all ecosystem services (FAO-PAR, 2011). Progress in this area could be made by adopting existing agricultural practices that have already been proven to have multiple benefits for food security and environmental health. However, there are barriers to adoption of these practices that need to be addressed through enabling means (e.g. investments, capacity building, financing, information, research, incentives and supportive policies). 7.4 Underlying principles: management of natural biological processes Sustainable crop production and climate change adaptation and mitigation in agriculture are not distinct from each other. The management of agro-ecosystems for producing food, fodder and fuel and the manage- ment of agro-ecosystems to adapt to and mitigate climate change have the same underlying principles and can work together to achieve the same goal: ensuring that everyone has enough safe, nutritious food now and in the future. Both crop production and climate change adaptation and mitigation require a resilient ecosystem, which can be attained through approaches and practices that are based on the sustainable man- agement of biodiversity and ecosystem services.

Climate-smart crop production is a sustainable crop production system, both of which address climate change. Sustainable agricultural systems provide opportunities for climate change adaptation and mitiga- tion by contributing to the delivery and maintenance of a range of public goods, such as clean water, carbon sequestration, flood protection, groundwater recharge and landscape amenity value. By definition, sustain- able agricultural systems are less vulnerable to shocks and stresses. In terms of technologies, productive and sustainable agricultural systems make the best of crop varieties and livestock breeds and their agro- ecological and agronomic management (Beddington et al., 2012).

The negative effects of climate change on productivity are already being felt by the agriculture sector. For example, in India, rice production decreased by 23 percent during 2001–2002 (FAOSTAT, 2012) because of drought. In Indonesia, flooding caused about 1 344 million tonnes of losses in rice production (Redfern et al., 2012). In Mississippi in the United States of America, flooding before the harvest season caused an estimat- ed loss of up to US$ 8 billion in 2008 (USGCRP, 2009). To secure future food production, crop production will need to adapt to and mitigate climate change. To contrast the effects of climate change, there is a need for a better understanding of the biological processes (below and above ground) involved in farm management practices. In this regard, ecosystem management must incorporate measures for building resilience and mitigating risk in agriculture. These elements are becoming increasingly critical under changing climatic conditions.