--- Disaster Risk Reduction: ---

Module 15:

Disaster Risk Reduction:

Strengthening Livelihood Resilience Overview This module will demonstrate how proven policies and practices in disaster risk reduction (DRR) can contribute to the objectives of climate-smart agriculture (CSA). There is a wide range of good practices in risk reduction and many potential contributions of DRR to CSA. This module presents some examples of practical methods, tools and technologies that have been applied successfully to reduce disaster risk in the agriculture sector. It also outlines the broad landscape of national institutional mechanisms, policy frameworks and strategies established in many countries for DRR, and looks at how these can create a supportive enabling environment for CSA. When capacity in DRR is combined with knowledge on adapta- tion, the results can be fruitful and far-reaching for CSA. Strategies designed to guide action and invest- ment in CSA will be more holistic in addressing the multiple threats to livelihoods with short- and long- term solutions. This module focuses on the potential contribution of risk reduction policy and practice to the achievement of the second pillar on which CSA is built: “strengthening resilience to climate change and variability”.

Section 15.1 provides an introduction to DDR and highlights the common ground it shares with emerg- ing practices in climate change adaptation. Section 15.2 illustrates how a multi-hazard approach that examines the diversity of threats to agriculture is effective for building resilient agricultural landscapes that are better protected against multiple shocks. Section 15.3 looks at community-based disaster risk management (CBDRM), and how it can support CSA as a proven bottom-up participatory approach to risk assessment, planning, implementation and monitoring at local levels. Section 15.4 makes reference to the vast pool of traditional knowledge and risk reduction technologies and practices used in the agri- cultural sector. It shows that CSA can achieve significant increases in scale by replicating these proven good practices. Section 15.5 reviews the current wealth of national institutional arrangements, policy and planning frameworks for DRR. It indicates that the significant achievements made in this area can be harnessed in support of CSA.

Key messages • Multi-hazard risk assessment and mapping combined with climate change scenarios provide a holis- tic framework for assessing all relevant hazards in specific geographic areas. • Proven DRR technologies and practice provide a rich resource-base for promoting and scaling up CSA. • CBDRM is a proven participatory method for assessing local risks and for informing local planning. It can be a vehicle and methodology for promoting CSA at local levels. • At national and regional levels, well-established legislation, institutional structures, policies and plans for DRR can provide CSA with a strong supportive enabling environment. • Building on the accumulated knowledge and practice in DRR increases the efficiency of international aid and government investments in CSA.