--- Ethekwini Municipality: governance ---

55 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems Many of the factors that drive land-use change operate or interact in different geographic areas and at differ- ent time scales. It is necessary to apply a planning framework that links these diverse planning processes (for example see Case Study 2.8 in section 2.3). If planning is made at the national or regional level without the involvement of local stakeholders, the chances that the implementation of planned activities will not be suc- cessful or sustainable increase. Conversely, activities planned at the landscape or community level that are not supported by enabling policies or governmental authorities may struggle to succeed due to a variety of factors, including, insufficient land tenure, poor infrastructure, and inadequate institutional and market structures.

Policies should be developed to support the planning processes at local levels and allow communities to man- age and benefit from the resources on the land where they live.

Planning for sustainable management of transboundary resources, such as water and animal species, re- quires coordination among stakeholders with competing claims, and among the institutions, laws and policies intended to create incentives for the sustainable use of resources. When land-use planning takes place at both macro- and micro-levels, national and local goals can be harmonized.

Landscape management and implementation Adaptive capacity is the key to implementing landscape management plans and strategies. Since landscapes change and evolve over time, the objective of sustainable management is not to maintain the status quo but to ensure the continued and growing supply of goods and services by practicing adaptive management (Sangha Group, 2008). In- stitutional structures and approaches, and the mindset of the stakeholders, need to acknowledge the fact that land- scapes are dynamic systems: stakeholders come and go, weather and climate patterns change, markets fluctuate.

Adaptive management for climate-smart agricultural landscapes should be characterized by a sound under- standing of ecosystem dynamics and take a flexible approach to governance that considers policies as works in progress and management actions as experiments that encourage learning and adjustments. As changes become apparent, new information is gained and incorporated into management processes. This allows for the review and revision of objectives and management strategies. The monitoring of drivers of change in the landscape is crucial for generating the data that can enable robust learning and adaptation.

Gathering information is all the more important considering that local stakeholders face high uncertainties about the impacts of environmental processes. They are also facing rapid economic and technological changes that can have dramatic effects on their livelihoods. In addition, local communities may have to react to new institutional and governance processes, such as more decentralized government administration or the in- creased involvement of the private sector. Social processes change with economic and institutional change.

Box 2.7 presents a case where local citizens became involved in the discussions and the decision-making pro- cess regarding ecosystem and landscape management in an urban context.

Box 2.7 Ethekwini Municipality: governance of the ecosystem management The Ethekwini Municipality, which governs the city of Durban, is located in southeast part of South Africa. For the past 25 years, it has been undergoing a sustainable development transformation that has sought to improve the local environment and develop plans to establish more open space within the city. Natural open spaces sustain goods and services, such as water, erosion control, food production, and the raw materials for fuel and building.

Citizens have engaged with the local government through the Local Agenda 21 Programme to guide the city towards an environmentally sustainable path. Having a diverse range of citizens with disparate interests, varying socio-economic and environmental backgrounds involved in discussion has made the development process challenging, but it is necessary to ensure that all stakeholders are held accountable.

Source: ICLEI, 2013 Gender relations, demographic trends (e.g. urban-rural migra- tions, southern-northern migra- tions) and cultural identities vary widely. These social factors need to be taken into account when con- sidering how to adapt to complex changes. Understanding how in- dividuals and households support themselves and try to secure and improve their well-being in the face of this complexity is a major chal- lenge. If these social factors are not acknowledged and monitored in the management system, they may