--- Page 265 ---

252
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Using EAF/EAA to build resilience to climate change
To build the resilience of the fisheries and aquaculture sector to the effects of climate change and to ensure
the sector delivers sustainable benefits, it is essential to adopt and adhere to best practices such as those re-
quested by the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and whose implementation is facilitated by the
EAF/EAA. Making progress in this direction would contribute to maintaining biodiversity, preserve the resilience
of human and aquatic systems to change, and improve the capacity to anticipate and adapt to climate-induced
changes in ecosystems and fisheries production systems. Direct benefits of implementing the EAF/EAA include:
• supporting ecosystems, communities and governance structures that are resilient by: decreasing the
exposure of the sector by increasing the aquatic systems’ potential to absorb and recover from change;
decreasing the human communities’ sensitivities to change; and increasing the sector’s adaptive capacity;
• improving the efficient use of natural and human resources for food and livelihood security;
• supporting inter-sectoral collaboration (e.g. integrating fisheries and aquaculture into national climate
change adaptation and disaster risk management [DRM] strategies and supporting integrated resource
management, such as integrated coastal zone or watershed management and water planning);
• promoting integrated monitoring and information systems that incorporate scientific and local knowledge
sources;
• improving general awareness of climate change inside and outside the sector;
• promoting context-specific and community-based adaptation strategies;
• avoiding ‘maladaptations’ (e.g. overly rigid fishing access regimes that inhibit fisher migrations and adap-
tation actions that would increase fishing in an overfished fishery);
• embracing adaptive management, decision-making under uncertainty and the precautionary approach;
and
• promoting natural barriers and defences rather than hard barriers that would affect the ecosystem.

Improving the general resilience of fisheries and aquaculture systems will reduce their vulnerability to climate
change. Biodiversity-rich systems may be less sensitive to change than overfished and biodiversity-poor sys-
tems. Healthy coral reef and mangroves systems can provide many benefits, including natural barriers to physi-
cal impacts. Fisheries- and aquaculture-dependent communities with strong social systems and a portfolio of
livelihood options have higher adaptive capacities and lower sensitivities to change. Larger-scale production sys-
tems with effective governance structures and adequate mobility of capital tend to be more resilient to change.
10.3 Practical themes for developing climate-smart
fisheries and aquaculture
Three key interlinking objectives for developing climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture are discussed below.
The first objective is connected closely to the broader food sector goal of sustainable intensification. It concerns
the provision of the primary means by which outputs can be expanded without placing excessive pressure on
fishery resources, including land, water, feed and fertilizing inputs. The second objective focuses on the need
to reduce the vulnerability associated with climate change impacts and to build the resilience required to cope
effectively with potential changes over the longer term. The final area concerns the means by which the sector
can be more strongly engaged in GHG mitigation processes.
Theme 1: Sustainably increasing output productivity/efficiency
There are two principle approaches for increasing productivity and efficiency. For capture fisheries, the essen-
tial issues are the reduction of excess capacity and ensuring the fishing effort is linked with improved fisheries
management and the maintenance of healthy and productive stocks and systems. Though total output might not
be increased to any significant extent, costs could be reduced, particularly fuel costs, and economic efficiency
would improve. Better stock conditions may also improve the catch quality. The better use of by-catch would
also enhance sectoral performance. By applying ecosystem approaches to resource management, climate
change impacts can be better accommodated into management responses. This would reduce the potential