--- Page 210 ---

197 MODULE 7: Climate-smart crop production system SCPI can be achieved through good farming practices that are based on improving efficiencies and man- aging biological processes. It is based on agricultural production systems and management practices that include: • maintaining healthy soil to enhance soil-related ecosystem services and crop nutrition; • cultivating a wider range of species and varieties in associations, rotations and sequences; • using quality seeds and planting materials of well adapted, high-yielding varieties; • adopting the integrated management of pests, diseases and weeds; and • managing water efficiently.

SCPI, and the crop production practices and approaches that it entails, is inherently climate smart. The sus- tainability of crop production systems presupposes that the risks and vulnerabilities arising from climate change are also addressed.

CSA aims at achieving the same food security objectives as sustainable agriculture, but through the lens of climate change.

It is important to understand that crop production, from land preparation through planting to the delivery of produce to the farm gate, constitutes an integral part of a farming system, which in turn is a part of the broader agro-ecosystem and landscape. The actual crop is but one element of an agro-ecosystem. Other elements include soil, biodiversity and ecosystem services— but crops can also be integrated within other production systems, such as agroforestry, integrated crop-livestock and rice-fish systems.

A priori, crop production is aimed at providing food security, contributing to sustainable diets, supplying raw materials for industries and generally, improving and sustaining livelihoods. The linkages between crop pro- duction to wider overarching agricultural production systems and its value in socio-economic contexts are Box 7.1 Integrated crop-livestock systems In conventional farming systems, there is a clear distinction between arable crops and pastureland. Under SCPI, this distinction is no longer applicable, since annual crops may be rotated with pasture without the destructive intervention of soil tillage (FAO, 2011). Practical innovations have harnessed synergies between crop, livestock and agroforestry production to improve the economic and ecological sustainability of agricultural systems and at the same time provide a flow of valued ecosystem services. Through increased biological diversity, efficient nutrient recycling, improved soil health and forest conservation, integrated systems increase environmental resilience and contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation. They also enhance livelihood diversification and efficiency by optimizing production inputs, including labour. In this way, integrated systems also increase producers’ resilience to economic stresses (FAO, 2011).

Integrated crop-livestock systems imply a diverse range of integrated ecological, biophysical and socio-economic conditions (FAO, 2010a). They aim to increase profits and sustain production levels while minimizing the negative effects of intensification and preserving natural resources (IFAD, 2009). They also have environmental, social and economic benefits. These systems, which enhance the natural biological processes above and below the ground, represent a synergistic combination that: (a) reduces erosion; (b) increases crop yields, soil biological activity and nutrient recycling; (c) intensifies land use, improving profits; and (d) can therefore help reduce poverty and malnutrition and strengthen environmental sustainability (IFAD, 2009).

There are numerous examples of how crop-livestock systems are being implemented. In the Southern Caucasus region, grain and livestock production have been integrated into a system of mixed farming in which cereals and pulses are grown in flatter, better-watered lowland soils and sheep and goats graze and browse on rougher upland terrain (whether locally or by means of seasonal transhumance). This has proven to be effective, both ecologically and nutritionally, in sustaining the growing number of sedentary villages (FAO, 2010b). Also, in Azerbaijan, near Xudat, farmers have adapted to the great diversity of land forms, climate and soils by developing a mosaic of crops and livestock systems. To protect wild biodiversity, soil and water resources, they alternate annual and perennial crops, and avoid cultivating crops in fragile environments (FAO, 2010b).