--- Page 108 ---

95 MODULE 3: Water management 3.7 Prioritizing options with an eye on vulnerable categories of people The combination of vulnerability assessments, impact assessments and screening of response options usu- ally produces a long list of possible actions. USAID (2007) has proposed a screening process for these actions using a series of criteria. The effectiveness of an option needs to be assessed as a solution to a problem aris- ing from climate change, and be measured in terms of its cost and the size of the beneficiary group. Where possible, actions with impacts on large groups, with low costs per beneficiary and high levels of effectiveness should be selected. Currently, such assessments are rarely done. Adaptation options are often discussed with no clear understanding of possible tradeoffs between costs and effectiveness. A much more systematic ap- proach to adaptation will be needed in this field.

Criteria for assessing the impacts of climate change and adaptation options must also include considerations of equity. Particular focus should be placed on the most vulnerable categories of rural people. Women’s ac- cess to water must be considered, both in terms of the impact of climate change and response options. Se- curing water rights in a way that is both effective and equitable will become increasingly important as water scarcity increases. In irrigation schemes, ‘tail-enders’, farmers located at the end of the irrigation canals, usually suffer more than other farmers during water shortages and floods. In river basins, downstream water users suffer from excessive water withdrawal from upstream users. Technologies and policies for climate change adaptation are not neutral in terms of equity. It is therefore important that they be analysed in terms of their impact on different groups of vulnerable people and that actions that would increase inequalities be eliminated from climate change adaptation programmes.

The adoption of a livelihood approach to water-related adaptation is a useful way to ensure that proposed actions will be beneficial to the people they are supposed to serve. Sullivan et al. (2008) consider four key dimensions of the water-related conditions of rural livelihoods: access to basic water services; crop and livestock water security; clean and healthy water environment; and secure and equitable water entitlement.

Using such entry points to screen the impact of adaptation options ensures that they will be assessed in ways that are in line with the concerns and priorities of rural populations.

Ease of implementation considers possible barriers to the implementation of a given option that could delay or reduce its impact. Such barriers could be policy-related, structural, institutional or social. Social barriers are related to the acceptability of proposed actions by local stakeholders. Specific policy or technical assis- tance may be required to overcome these barriers. Other relevant criteria include technical feasibility and the time frame for implementation.

Adequacy for the current climate is an important criterion to consider. Here, possible options should be analysed in terms of their ‘level of regret’. Low-regret or no-regret options are those options that are valid whether expected climate change impacts occur or not. In general, these options increase the resilience of rural populations and reduce their vulnerability to water-related shocks. Instead, many options, in particular options dealing with infrastructure, can be considered high-regret options: they would be valid for future climate scenarios but not necessarily for the current climate situation. They would therefore involve higher costs and have possible negative consequences under current climate conditions, and require careful consid- eration in terms of risk analysis.

All options must be considered in relation with the uncertainty associated with climate change predictions.

Their robustness in terms of the above criteria (in particular effectiveness and adequacy for current climate) must be assessed against different climate change scenarios and global circulation models (see Module 18 on assessments and monitoring).