--- Page 131 ---

118 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Prevention measures should be adopted to avoid soil compaction. An example is controlled traffic systems that minimize traffic and keep compaction in wheel tracks out of the crop area. Another example is minimum- tillage in combination with a plant or litter cover. This provides organic matter that enhances the activity of soil fauna (e.g. earthworms and termites). The burrowing of these soil organisms breaks up compacted layers and incorporates SOM from the surface into the soil. Also, specific cover crops with strong roots such as radish or pigeon peas can be used to penetrate and break up compacted soils layers. In time, practices such as conser- vation agriculture (that combine minimized soil disturbance with increased soil cover and crop diversification) will allow SOM to build up and increase the soil’s resilience to climate change. Such practices build up a cover of protective vegetation or litter that foster the biological-tillage activity of macro-fauna (such as earthworms) that burrow and make channels for air and water. These practices also incorporate and break down organic matter in the soil.

Managing soil organic matter for soil carbon sequestration Soil carbon stocks and the mitigation potential they provide depend on the agroclimatic zone, the land use type and the intensity of use. The rate of SOM decomposition and turnover depends primarily on the combined ef- fects of the soil biota, temperature, moisture and its chemical and physical composition. It is also affected by the previous land use and natural resource management practices (particularly the mechanical disturbance of the soil).

Tillage-based agricultural practices over the last 50 to 100 years, which are associated soil degradation, have caused SOC levels in many regions to decline by one to three percent. As shown in Table 4.1, a three percent loss in SOC not only represents a significant loss of water storage (432 000 litres per hectare) but also repre- sents nearly 400 tonnes of extra CO2 per hectare emitted into the atmosphere. Loss of SOC and water holding capacity is associated with practices such as the elimination of perennial groundcover, repetitive cultivation or continuous grazing, bare fallows, removal of crop residues and grassland burning.

The monoculture of cash crops and the high use of external inputs have been an approach farmers have adopted to achieve the highest possible yields with minimal labour. However, fossil fuel prices have increased, and the production of energy-intensive mineral fertilizers and pesticides is a major source of GHG emissions.

Moreover, when incorrectly applied, these inputs leach into water resources and the resulting water contami- nation has serious deleterious effects on ecosystems and human health. Diversified crop rotations and im- proved techniques for the management of fertilizer, seeds and pesticides can make the application of inputs more efficient. This reduces the wastage of external inputs and thereby reduces the amount of inputs needed.

Greater efficiency in this area can also potentially lower GHG emissions. By improving soil structure and in- creasing soil biodiversity, no-till cultivation and the control of soil compaction will also reduce GHG emissions, which result mainly from anaerobic soil conditions.

Boosting nutrient management With agricultural intensification, organic fertilizers (manure, compost and plant residues) are increasingly supplemented by inorganic or synthetic fertilizers, which provide required crop nutrients, including: • Macronutrients (e.g. nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium and sulphur); and • micronutrients (e.g. boron, chlorine, copper, iron, manganese, molybdenum, zinc and nickel).

Mechanized systems emit considerable GHG emissions as does the manufacturing and processing of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers. In 2007, the global emission of GHGs from the production and application of nitrogen fer- tilizers amounted to 750 to 1 080 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent, or about one to two percent of total global GHG emissions (Niggli et al., 2009). The fertilizer industry recognizes that it contributes directly and indirectly to emissions of GHGs, particularly CO2 and N2O, through the production, distribution and use of fertilizers.

The industry is encouraging clean technologies and greater efficiencies in the manufacture and application of fertilizers (IFA, 2009).