--- Page 562 ---

550 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Ecosystem: The interactive system formed from all living organisms and their abiotic (physical and chemical) environment within a given area. Ecosystems cover a hierarchy of spatial scales and can comprise the entire globe, biomes at the continental scale or small, well-circumscribed systems such as a small pond.

Ecosystem functioning: Builds on the processes shaped by interactions among biological communities of both wild and domesticated species, biophysical processes such as water regulation, and nutrient recycling.

Ecosystem services: Ecological processes or functions that have monetary or non-monetary value to indi- viduals or society at large. There are: supporting services such as productivity or biodiversity maintenance; provisioning services such as food, fibre, or fish; regulating services such as climate regulation or carbon se- questration; and cultural services such as tourism or spiritual and aesthetic appreciation.

Ecosystem resilience: The capacity of an ecosystem to absorb external pressure or perturbations through change and re-organisation, but still retain the same basic structure and ways of functioning.

E-learning (electronic learning): Term covering a wide set of applications and processes, such as Web-based learning, computer-based learning, virtual classrooms, and digital collaboration. It includes the delivery of content via Internet, intranet/extranet (LAN/WAN), audio- and videotape, satellite broadcast, interactive TV, CD-ROM, and more.

Energy efficiency: Ratio of energy output of a conversion process or of a system to its energy input.

Enteric fermentation: Enteric fermentation is a natural part of the digestive process for many ruminant ani- mals where anaerobic microbes, called methanogens, decompose and ferment food present in the digestive tract producing compounds that are then absorbed by the host animal. A resulting byproduct of this process is methane.

Enteric methane: Methane emitted as a natural by-products of microbial fermentation of carbohydrates and, to a lesser extent, amino acids in the rumen and the hindgut of farm animals.

Erosion: The process of removal and transport of soil and rock by weathering, mass wasting, and the action of streams, glaciers, waves, winds and underground water.

Evaporation: The amount of water that leaves the basin or country as vapor. Evaporation can be beneficial or non-beneficial. Non-beneficial (Enb) includes evaporation from open water bodies (reservoirs, canals) and from bare soil.

Evapotranspiration: It is the sum of evaporation and plant transpiration. It is the water lost from an area through the combined effects of evaporation from the ground surface and transpiration from the vegetation.

Ex-situ conservation: The maintenance of genetic material outside of the ‘normal’ environment where the spe- cies has evolved and aims to maintain the genetic integrity of the material at the time of collecting. Gene banks, botanical gardens and zoos are typical examples of ex-situ conservation activities.

Exposure: The nature and degree to which a system is exposed to significant climatic variations.

Extension: Rural or agricultural extension services refer to the transfer of research and new practices through farmer training. Successful extension does not merely facilitate the use of new technology or crop alternatives, but empowers farmers to make farm management decisions based on knowledge of options available to them.

Externalities: Situations when the effect of production or consumption of goods and services imposes costs or benefits on others which are not reflected in the prices charged for the goods and services being provided.