--- Leone presented in Box 5.6. ---

164
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
are mainly women, receive funding to purchase a cow and a calf from an organic tea farm. The women
then repay the loan through the sale of milk and dung. In the second scheme, still in its pilot phase, house-
holds receive loans from the organic tea farm to pay for setting up a biogas system. The households repay
the loan by selling dung and/or the slurry to the tea farm. Once the biogas installation has been completely
paid for, the households have the option to continue selling the slurry and dung to the farm.
• ‘Fee for service’7 schemes, such as ESCO, leasing or concession arrangements schemes are other options
for financing energy-smart food.

The need for cross-sectoral coordination in bioenergy development is illustrated by the example from Sierra
Leone presented in Box 5.6.
A multi-partner programme for scaling up energy-smart food
Shifting to more energy-smart food systems is an important step towards reaching the broader CSA goals.
Decision-makers need to adopt a long-term view to make the needed paradigm shift to food systems that are
energy-smart and contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation as well as food security. Although
this shift will not be fully accomplished in the short term, there is no time for delay. The key question at hand
is not, ‘If or when we should we begin the transition to energy-smart food systems?’, but rather ‘How can we
get started and make gradual but steady progress?’ The shift towards energy-smart food systems will be grad-
ual and can only be achieved through sustained efforts. Understanding and implementing energy-smart food
systems is a complex multidisciplinary task that requires a multipartner programme. Towards this end, the
Energy-Smart Food for People and Climate was launched in 2012. It aims to help countries promote energy-
smart agrifood systems through the identification, planning and implementation of climate-smart measures
that integrate energy, water and food security.
7 Fee-for-service (FFS) is a payment model where services are unbundled and paid for separately.
Box 5.6
Bioenergy addressed through a cross-ministerial platform in Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone, a post-conflict resource-rich country, is classified as a low-income food-deficit country. Seventy
percent of the population lives below the poverty line and 35 percent are undernourished. Agriculture is a key
sector of the economy. The country depends heavily on imported fossil fuels, fuelwood and charcoal for household
energy, and the population has minimal access to electricity. Currently, modern bioenergy is not produced in Sierra
Leone, but a number of investors are moving into the country. Bioenergy development in such a fragile environment
can involve major risks, but may represent an opportunity to attract much needed investment in agriculture.
Agriculture-led growth through bioenergy investments could reduce poverty, stimulate the economy and increase
access to energy. However, the process for achieving this needs to be clearly understood and carefully managed.
The inclusion of smallholder farmers, social protection, and sustainable resource management are key elements
in the process.
The Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MEWR) formally requested the technical support of FAO to assess
the potential for sustainable bioenergy development in the country using the Bioenergy and Food Security (BEFS)
approach. A first step was the establishment of an interministerial working group, the Bioenergy and Food Security
Working Group (BEFS WG). Its first activity was to identify the country’s main concerns and challenges for bioenergy
development as well as the country’s immediate needs and longer-term requirements. One of these immediate
needs is to have information that would allow Sierra Leone to screen and direct investors coming to the country. The
working group is currently developing a set of guidelines for sustainable bioenergy investment. As land grabbing is
becoming a major concern in Sierra Leone, the guidelines will address the issue of community inclusion and conflict
management. In the longer term, there is the need to identify the country’s potential for sustainable bioenergy
development, cover data and information gaps, and address long-term institutional requirements and training needs
both at policy and technical levels.