--- Page 27 ---

14 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Rice-Fish integrated systems have been traditionally practiced in many Asian countries, either as concurrent or alternate cultivation (FAO et al., 2001) and constitute another example of very productive systems that also provide more balanced diets. They hold great potential to improve food security and nutrition and can be both improved and up-scaled as shown by recent research in Bangladesh (Ahmed N. and Garnett S., 2011; Dey M et al., 2012).

Agroforestry is the use of trees and shrubs as part of agricultural systems. It contributes to prevent soil ero- sion, facilitates water infiltration and diminishes the impacts of extreme weather. Agroforestry also helps diversify income sources and provides energy and often fodder for livestock. Nitrogen-fixing leguminous trees, such as Faidherbia albida, increase soil fertility and yields (Bames and Fagg, 2003; Garrity, 2010).

Community-led projects and relaxed forestry measures that enable farmers to manage their trees have led to considerable development of Faidherbia in Niger through farmer-managed natural regeneration (Garrity 2010). Since 2000, FAO has initiated special programmes for food security with the governments of Guate- mala, Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador among others (see box 6). These programmes work together, sharing practices, experiences and results to improve and develop agroforestry systems. Agroforestry sys- tems are promoted in the subregion as a substitute to traditional slash-and-burn systems, particularly on slopes. Under these systems, productivity of land and labour are increased. Yields are less variable, partly due to better retention of moisture in the soils. The soil is also protected from hydric erosion. Farm produc- tion, including wood products, is more diversified, which stabilizes incomes. As they are more efficient in the use of land, agroforestry reduces the pressure on forests, avoiding deforestation which contributes to climate change mitigation. As wood is produced in the fields, these systems also contribute to preventing forest degradation. Agroforestry systems use less fertilizer, reducing the direct emissions of N2O and indi- rect GHG emissions created through fertilizer production. By increasing biomass above ground and in soils, they help create carbon sinks.

There is now interest for using carbon projects to facilitate the development of agroforestry. Examples in- clude the Nhambita community carbon project in Mozambique, initiated in 2003. A small-scale agroforestry- based carbon sequestration project, registered with the Plan Vivo system aims to sequester carbon through agroforestry practices, sell carbon credits in international voluntary carbon markets and improve livelihoods in the local community. The Community Association, the body established in 2002 by the Rural Association for Mutual Support (ORAM) as a part of a national government programme to regularize traditional commu- nities’ tenure rights, helps to identify the households that wish to become part of the agroforestry scheme and is responsible for the management of the carbon payments, which are transferred into a community fund (Spirik, 2009).

Reduce food losses and waste Global food losses and waste amount to a third of all food produced (Gustavsson et al., 2011). These losses and waste also mean that the GHG emitted during their production have served no useful purpose. This is espe- cially true when the food has reached the end of the food chain, when the embedded emissions for transport and conservation are very high.

Global differences among regions in food loss and waste for the same type of products indicate potential areas for improvement (Gustavsson et al., 2011). In Europe, cereal losses and waste are twice as high as in sub-Sa- haran Africa. On the other hand, in sub-Saharan Africa, milk losses and waste are twice as high as in Europe.

Depending on the products, regions, and levels of economic development, the distribution of the losses along the food chain is very different. For instance, in Africa cereals are lost in the first stages of the food chain. In Europe, they are lost mostly at the consumer stage: 25 percent against 1 percent in Africa. For fruits and veg- etables, the differences between regions are also striking. In Africa, processing and distribution are the weak links. This highlights the need for investments in these stages of the food chain. In Europe, it is at the produc- tion and consumption stages where most losses occur.