--- Page 269 ---

256
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
In a number of contexts, interactions with other sectors, themselves affected by climate change, are also likely
to be important. Inland fisheries are particularly sensitive to policies and actions outside the sector. In the
same vein, many coastal environments are also increasingly subject to changes in freshwater runoff, agricul-
tural intensification, growth in the industrial and energy sector, expanded urbanization, transport and tourism
development. For aquaculture, there are similar issues of interaction and tradeoffs with other sectors, particu-
larly regarding land and water use, aquatic and terrestrially derived feeds, and the negotiation of coastal space.
Defining and valuing the role and needs of the fisheries and aquaculture sector, raising awareness about the
sector and negotiating balanced outcomes across sectors are key challenges (see Module 2 on landscape
approach). There may also be important issues for GHG mitigation, which would be best addressed through
integrated sectoral approaches.

Understanding and reducing vulnerability
Vulnerability to climate change in the sector is experienced across a range of productive, social and political
dimensions and will also depend on timing and locations of changes. For example, climate risks may be felt
Box 10.6
Options for culture based fisheries to improve climate resilience
Culture-based fisheries (CBF) is typically a perennial and seasonal stock enhancement process. It is practiced
in smaller water bodies that under normal conditions are incapable of supporting a fishery through natural
recruitment. In CBF, the stocked fish are managed communally with ownership rights. It therefore falls within
the realm of aquaculture. Recently, the practice has gained momentum due to the increasing demand for fish
and improvements in seed stock production and availability. CBF has also become a major part of government
strategies to increase food fish production and improve livelihoods, particularly in impoverished rural communities
(Amarasinghe and Nguyen, 2009).
CBF as an environmentally friendly food production system
In many instances, CBF is seen as a practice with a small environmental footprint and a good example of multiple,
effective use of water resources (De Silva, 2003).
CBF does not consume water or external feed resources. The only input is the seed stock. The stocked species
are selected in such a manner that all food niches are filled and that the natural food production is adequate
to maintain growth and well-being of the stock. Consequently, the yields are much less than in most intensive
aquaculture practices. However, CFB is environmentally friendly and the cost input is minimal with no feed related
GHG contribution. This semi-intensive to extensive form of aquaculture often utilizes communal water bodies. For
governments in developing countries, the practice is an attractive means for increasing food fish production and
food security among rural communities.
The possibilities of the stocked fish mingling with wild counterparts are higher than in normal aquaculture practices.
For this reason, whenever possible, indigenous fish species are advised for CBF. Also, hatchery bred stocks should
originate from well managed broodstocks. Ideally, the broodstocks would originate from wild stocks; however,
some form of risk assessment is always recommended before stocking.
In China, it is estimated that in 2008 CBF contributed to a catch increase of 120 000 tonnes, with a value of US$ 225
million. The cost/benefit ratio of resource enhancement is around 1:5. This translates into 1.5 million professional
fishers increasing their profits by US$ 150 per capita. The large-scale jellyfish release programme carried out in
China’s Liaoning Province significantly increased the catch of jellyfish. In 2009, the catch volume reached 23 500
tonnes. As a result, 130 000 fishers increased their profits by nearly US$ 150 per capita (Liu, 2009).
CBF sensitivity to climate change and adaptation potential
The stocking and harvesting in CBF is almost entirely dictated by the elements. Stocking is best done when the
water body is at full supply level, and harvesting takes place when the water level recedes. As a result, the practice
will be affected by climate change, particularly changes in rainfall patterns. Also, in areas where a large number of
water bodies are used for CBF, there could be an unexpected glut in the availability of food fish. Consequently, there
will be a need to put in place strategies to minimize these effects through staggered harvesting and a coordinated
marketing strategy. If done using an ecosystem perspective, good climate forecasting and proper CBF planning are
climate-smart strategies. Watershed authorities or lake and reservoir authorities should be aware of CBF practices
in order to improve water management and ensure the coordinated use of water resources.