--- Page 107 ---

94 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Adaptation at watershed, river basin and national levels Climate change adaptation at higher levels will involve a combination of policy adjustments and investments in infrastructure and management. In river basins, increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events will require adjustments in the storage capacity and management of dams and river protection works.

More than in the past, flood management plans will need to combine infrastructure upgrades with non- structural, information-rich approaches that can better mitigate the impact of floods through a combination of land planning, early warning and insurance schemes. Similarly, there will be a need to shift from drought emergency response to drought management plans that include prevention, preparedness, relief and reha- bilitation and long-term measures to mitigate the impacts of droughts (FAO and NDMC, 2008).

In all these cases, adaptation approaches to floods and droughts used by water managers and farming com- munities should be considered systematically. Examples include flood mitigation through the cultivation of varieties of rice that respond differently to different levels of flooding, or the combined cropping of bean varie- ties with varying resistance to droughts. Habitat engineering and rehabilitation will also be needed to reduce the severity of flood impacts and provide erosion control, nutrients, shade and oxygen. This will also create suitable environments for fish production.

Integrated water resources management in river basins will become more and more important as the com- bination of increased water use and the occurrence of extreme events will increase the interdependency of people and communities living in river basins, and as actions in one part of a basin will have repercussions for people further downstream. In places where climate change contributes to increased water scarcity, the whole package of supply enhancement and demand management options will need to be considered (FAO, 2012). Improved governance of land and water use will be required to accommodate the multiple uses of wa- ter, including for livestock and fish.

Improved weather forecasting and hydrological monitoring will become a critical element of modern ad- aptation strategies (Faurès et al., 2010). Currently reliable weather forecasting is still limited to a few days.

However, progressive improvements in the timing and reliability of seasonal forecasts offer new opportunities for farming communities (more on assessments in Module 12). As efforts focus on improving the accuracy of these forecasts, more emphasis should now be given to improving the way information is conveyed to farm- ers and building their capacity to make best use of climate information (Gommes et al., 2010). Monitoring and early warning during the cropping season remain a priority to help farmers make informed decisions.

Insurances represent a potential solution that should also be systematically considered as part of adaptation strategies. There is a renewed interest in various types of crop insurance, as well as aquaculture and fishing insurances, that could be adapted to developing countries. National crop insurance schemes have been test- ed in some countries, but they face substantial challenges in terms of costs and institutional settings. So far, few commercial insurance companies have found it to be an attractive business opportunity. Roberts (2005) focused on the need to smooth tensions between insurance that is run as business for commercial profit and the protection of small farmers that is in the strategic national interest. Insurance companies need to be solid and well-backed. International reinsurance could play an important stabilizing role and provide backup for emerging national companies. The role of national governments in promoting crop insurances must reflect national interests and at the same time ensure the smooth operation of private insurance companies. This must be based on the concept of shared risk between producers, insurance companies and governments.

A type of insurance which has recently been applied in developing countries is known as index-based insur- ance. In index-based products, compensation is paid to the insured if the agreed threshold of an index is ex- ceeded. The indices must be defined in such a way that they bear a direct relationship with the performance of the product insured. Index-based insurance is difficult to apply to small-scale hazards but seems to have good potential for hazards with regional impacts like hurricanes or droughts (Gommes et al., 2010).