--- Page 236 ---

223 MODULE 8: Climate-smart Livestock Water use efficiency and management In the coming decades, water management will be a critical component for adapting to climate change as well as socio-economic changes. Practices that increase the productivity of water use (defined as crop output per unit of water) may have significant climate change adaptation potential for all land production systems. A number of adaptation techniques and approaches that are specific to water management include: cultivation of crop varieties with increased resistance to extreme conditions; irrigation techniques that maximize wa- ter use; adoption of supplementary irrigation in rain-fed systems and water-efficient technologies to harvest water; and the modification of cropping calendars (timing or location) (FAO, 2011a). Descheemaeker et al. (2010) cite three broad strategies for improving livestock-water productivity in mixed crop-livestock systems: feed management (e.g. improving feed quality, increasing feed-water productivity, enhancing feed selection, strengthening grazing management); water management; and animal management (e.g. increasing animal productivity and health).

Sustainable soil management Carbon sequestration in soils has the potential to mitigate climate change and bolster climate change ad- aptation (Pascal and Socolow, 2004). A climate-smart strategy involves creating a positive carbon budget in soils and ecosystems by using residues as mulch in combination with no-till farming and integrated nutrient management (i.e. the appropriate application of both synthetic and organic fertilizer). In addition, soil carbon sequestration delivers numerous ancillary benefits by improving soil quality and other ecosystem services.

Restoration of degraded soils, through increases in soil organic carbon pools, improves production, which helps foster food security and improves nutrition. Increasing the pool of soil organic carbon is also important for improving efficiency in the use of nitrogen and potassium. Water quality also improves through a greater control of non-point source pollution (Lal, 2009).

Feed management Herrero et al. (2008) estimate that crop residues can represent up to 50 percent of the diet of ruminants in mixed farming systems. While these feed resources provide an inexpensive feed source, they are usually of low digestibility and deficient in crude protein, minerals and vitamins. This low digestibility substantially limits productivity and increases CH4 emissions. Increasing the digestibility of feed rations by improving the quality of crop residues, or supplementing diets with concentrates will reduce CH4 emissions. Other existing feed management practices in mixed farming systems include the use of improved grass species and forage leg- umes. Animal productivity can be improved by using a multidimensional approach for improving the quality and thereby the utilization of food-feed crops. This can also lead to a reduction in animal numbers, lower feed requirements and reduced GHG emissions (Blümmel et al., 2009).

Diversification to climate-resilient agricultural production systems The diversification of sensitive production systems can enhance adaptation to the short- and medium-term impacts from climate change. Transitions within mixed farming systems are already occurring. In marginal areas of southern Africa, reductions in length of growing period and increased rainfall variability are leading to conversions from mixed crop–livestock systems to rangeland-based systems, as farmers find growing crops too risky in marginal environments (Thornton et al., 2009). Changing the mix of farm products (e.g. proportion of crops to pastures) is an example of a farm-level adaptation option. Farmers may reassess the crops and varieties they grow, and shift from growing crops to raising livestock, which can serve as marketable insur- ance in times of drought. They may also introduce heat-tolerant breeds that are more resistant to drought. In a case study covering villages in three South African provinces, Thomas et al. (2007) found that during dry spells farmers tended to reduce their investment in crops or even stop planting altogether and focused instead on livestock production.

In most cases, these practices deliver multiple benefits. However, before long-term benefits can be reaped, there are some tradeoffs that need to be made in the short term with respect to emissions, productivity and food security. Consequently, despite the long-term benefits, poor subsistence farmers may not be willing or able to accept the short-term losses associated with some of these practices.