--- Page 37 ---

24 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK but considered on a case by case basis in conjunction with the emissions from the production stage as part of a life cycle analysis. Restricting trade and producing locally may both increase GHG emissions (and other environmental costs) per unit of output as well as reducing economic efficiency.

International trade is – and has been – an essential factor for the resilience of food systems (Meridian Institute, 2011; Nelson et al., 2010; HLPE, 2012a). As shown above, climate change is expected to have different effects in various regions of the world. Available research indicates that climate change is expected to lead to important changes in the geographical distribution of agricultural production potential, with increases in mid to high latitudes and a decrease in low latitudes. International trade plays an important role in compensating, albeit partially, for regional changes in productivity that are induced by climate change. Together with productivity changes, changes in endowments of arable land and usable water, developments in energy markets, popula- tion growth and government policies, both existing agricultural policies and climate-related policies, all drive the patterns of regional specialisation and of international trade.

Trade can compensate for local production deficits caused by increased variability and extreme events. How- ever, recent commodity price volatility has shown that trade does not always buffer local production variations (HLPE, 2011; MacMahon, 2011; FAO, 2012d). On the contrary, it can exacerbate and transmit the effects of a local shock, and consequently it can become a factor of systemic risk. In addition, price volatility has hit poor importing countries especially hard (HLPE, 2011). Trade could then appear as a factor of risk, rather than a way to cope with shocks. The ability to realize the compensating potential of international trade depends on a well-functioning international trade architecture. Imposing import restrictions, perhaps motivated by the de- sire to increase domestic production in the face of declining yields, and hence confounding food security with food self-sufficiency, is clearly not a sustainable solution. Likewise, imposing export restrictions in surplus regions, as witnessed during food price spikes in 2007/2008 and motivated by the objective to keep domestic prices low relative to world prices, creates problems for food importing countries and undermines the trust in the functioning of the global trade system.

Overdependence on imports to satisfy national needs can lead to severe food crises for the poor during price upsurges, which are often aggravated by measures to restrict exports. Trade’s role in improving the resilience of food systems would be enhanced paying greater attention to food security concerns (HLPE, 2011and 2012a). 1.3 Increase systemic efficiency and resilience: policies, institutions finances Appropriate policies, institutions and finances are essential to increase systemic resilience and efficiency at local, national and international level and to achieve needed changes in agricultural and food systems. These are detailed below (see also Module 12 on institutions, 13 on policies and 14 on financing CSA).

Invest in agriculture in developing countries There is already a gap today in funding for investment in developing countries. The needs will increase. FAO estimated that cumulative gross investment requirements for agriculture in developing countries add up to nearly US$ 9.2 trillion until 2050 or nearly US$ 210 billion annually (FAO, 2009c). Therefore, the decreasing trend in funding has to be reversed. It includes increasing the share of Official Development Assistance di- rected to agriculture. Domestic efforts have to be pursued at the appropriate level.

The needs are even greater when the need to address the challenges of climate change is included (FAO 2010a, Nelson et al., 2009, Nelson et al. 2010, HLPE 2012). It must be emphasized that the major part of these invest- ments will be made by the private sector, and most of them by the farmers themselves. Public actors can play a key role in building an enabling environment, including policies, institutions and key investments. Reducing risk and improving resilience is key to enabling private actors, especially the more financially vulnerable, to invest. Often these private actors will also need support, particularly during the transition phase towards new