--- Box 8.1 Silvopastoral systems in Central and South America ---

222 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK oped public-private partnership approaches to index-based livestock insurance, in which the public sector underwrites a share of these risks, could play an important role. Indexed insurance schemes based on satellite imagery are being piloted in several areas of drought-prone northern Kenya (Barrett et al., 2008; Mude, 2009).

Agroforestry practices Agroforestry is an integrated approach to the production of trees and non-tree crops or animals on the same piece of land. Agroforestry is important both for climate change mitigation (carbon sequestration, improved feed and consequently reduced enteric methane) and for adaptation in that it improves the resilience of agri- cultural production to climate variability by using trees to intensify and diversify production and buffer farming systems against hazards. Shade trees reduce heat stress on animals and help increase productivity. Trees also improve the supply and quality of forage, which can help reduce overgrazing and curb land degradation (Thornton and Herrero, 2010).

Mixed systems Because they serve multiple purposes, mixed livestock systems, if well managed, may be among the most promising means of adapting to climate change and mitigating the contribution of crop and livestock produc- tion to GHG emissions. There are a number of agronomic techniques and livestock management practices that have proven to be effective in delivering multiple benefits (food security, and improved climate change mitiga- tion and adaptation). The options presented below deal with integrated mixed systems but focus on livestock- related interventions for CSA.

Integrated soil-crop-water management Soil and water are intrinsically linked to crop and livestock production. For this reason, an integrated approach to soil and water management is vital for increasing efficiency in the use of resources, adapting to and miti- gating climate change, and sustaining productivity. For example, by increasing the organic content of the soil through conservation tillage, the soil’s water holding capacity increases, which makes yields more resilient and reduces erosion (Lal, 2009). Existing soil and water adaptation technologies include: minimum or zero till- age; erosion control; the use of crop residues to conserve soil moisture; and improved soil cover through cover crops. By increasing water infiltration, reducing evaporation and increasing storage of rainwater in soils, many crop management practices (e.g. mulching, green manures, conservation tillage and conservation agriculture) will help land users in areas projected to receive lower levels of precipitation adapt to climate change. Pro- moting the capture of carbon in the soil also mitigates climate change. Soil management practices that limit soil compaction, reduce tillage and retain crop residues lower the potential for N2O loss, increase soil carbon and at the same time improve yields. In addition, managing pests, diseases or weeds using technologies such as the ‘pull-and-push technology’ can contribute to improving the availability of food and animal feed in crop- livestock systems (Lenné and Thomas, 2005).

Box 8.1 Silvopastoral systems in Central and South America In a Global Environmental Facility (GEF) funded project, the Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher Education Centre (CATIE) worked with FAO, Nitlapan in Nicaragua and the Fundación Centre for Research on Sustainable Farming Systems (CIPAV) in Colombia and the World Bank to evaluate the impacts of payment for environmental services on the adoption of silvopastoral systems. From 2003 to 2006, cattle farmers from Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua, received between US$ 2 000 and US$ 2 400 per farm (an amount that represents 10 to 15 percent of their net income) to implement the programme on silvopastoral systems. The programme led to a 60 percent reduction in degraded pastures in the three countries, and the area of land used for silvopastoral systems (e.g. improved pastures with high density trees, fodder banks and live fences) increased significantly. The environmental benefits associated with the project included a 71 percent increase in carbon sequestration (from 27.7 million tonnes of CO2-eq in 2003 to 47.6 million tonnes CO2-eq in 2006). Milk production increased by 10 percent, and farm income rose by 115 percent.

Herbicide use dropped by 60 percent, and the practice of using fire to manage pasture is now less frequent.

Source: FAO, 2010a