--- Page 475 ---

462 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK These approaches can bring about significant results in resilience building, reversing land degradation, risk reduction and adaptation to climate shocks, but they are not always possible. Of course, applying techniques – such as participatory watershed management approaches – to their full potential requires significant ca- pacities and investments not only from the communities, but also from local institutions and government authorities. Ensuring and sustaining the planning and management effort over a long period of time among both communities and governments is an indispensable factor, especially in poor and degraded environments.

Scale, timeframes, continuity and impact Social protection and safety nets interventions can deliver different results and outcomes depending on the in- stitutional, programming and funding structures. Well-established national safety nets programmes may offer the necessary social, institutional and operational framework for interventions to have ambitious targets and long-term horizons. Conversely, interventions, programmes and initiatives of shorter durations may inevitably have to set more limited targets and objectives. In practical terms, and to remain on the example of a large- scale community-based watershed management programme, experience shows that in order to succeed and “reach scale”, these interventions normally require longer timeframes and continuity of institutional, technical and political efforts. Other activities of shorter duration may have to operate at a lower level with less ambi- tious targets.

However, this does not mean that only long-term interventions can generate sustainable results. Much of the current debate about “building resilience” stresses the role that even more limited interventions can play in supporting livelihoods and productive enhancements among poor communities. Therefore, one of the main challenges is to ensure a convergence and continuity of efforts and an alignment of short and more long-term interventions within the parameters set by a broader policy environment targeting poor and food insecure communities. CSA interventions will have to follow the same logic, as disaster risk reduction, adaptation and resilience building activities supported by resource transfers also need to take these aspects into account.

Continuity of programmes increases the ability to achieve the required transformational changes.

The impact of resource transfers on productivity and resilience is of course linked to the objective of the in- tervention, which should always be informed by the specifics of the context in which it is undertaken. For example, the main objective of large-scale safety nets, such as Ethiopia’s PSNP or Kenya’s Hunger Safety Net Programme that cover millions of food insecure households, is to meet their food needs and to prevent more people from falling into poverty. This is a tremendous challenge in itself, particularly in view of increasing cli- mate related risks. Given the limited capacities, also in terms of funding, there is an obvious trade-off between ensuring basic food security on the one hand, and enhancing productivity and resilience on the other.

Transfer selection, timing, incentives and disincentives One often discussed programming area centres on transfer selection, or more narrowly the longstanding ‘cash versus food’ debate. It is now widely recognized that the choice of the most appropriate safety net transfers – in cash, food or vouchers – hinges on properly assessed context-specific conditions. These include programme objectives, the spatial and temporal functioning of markets, the availability of implementation capacities and delivery mechanisms, cost-efficiency analysis, and beneficiaries’ preferences (Gentilini, 2007). For example, the use of vouchers or smart cards in Kenya was found to be particularly appropriate for pastoralists, as it did not tie them to one place (WFP, 2012c; see also WFP, 2009).

The timing of resource transfers, particularly in the context of food-for-work activities, is another important issue to be considered. Without careful planning, participation in food-for-work programmes might provide essential food today, but hinder labour investments in future productivity. Conducting food-for-work activities during the agriculture productive season and providing transfers that are above prevailing market rates can divert labour from peoples’ farms. In turn, timing in the non-productive season and at a net level at or below market rates would not pull labour from private production, and gains made could be redirected into private agricultural investment (WFP, 2012d).