--- Page 20 ---

7 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries in temperature at a critical stage of plant growing can compromise a crop. As changes in variability are easier for farmers to apprehend, they could constitute a first target for early adaptation measures (Padgham, 2009). It is therefore important to distinguish between these two categories of impacts to highlight two ways to adapt, each with different time ranges: increasing resilience now to be prepared for more variability, and increasing adaptive capacities and preparedness for slow onset changes. Furthermore, being prepared for increased variability is also a way to prepare for any other change, whatever it may be.

Agriculture’s impact on climate change The agriculture sector has to produce more food and it will be certainly impacted by climate change. As an integral part of the economy, it has also been called upon to contribute to mitigate climate change (UNFCCC 2008). The question is how and to what extent agriculture and food systems can contribute to climate change mitigation without compromising food and nutrition security.

In 2005, agriculture (crop and livestock) directly accounted for 13.5 percent of global GHG emissions (IPCC, 2007b). This figure is based on activities carried out in the fields and with livestock. But agriculture’s role in climate change and, importantly, its mitigation potential, should be considered in a wider perspective of ‘food systems’. This includes the impact these systems have on forests, the energy sector and transport.

Expanding our consideration of agriculture’s role in climate change is warranted because some of the on farm emissions are not included in the 13.5 percent figure, but are grouped in other sectors, such as electric- ity used in farm buildings and fuel used in farm equipment and food transport. Also, agriculture is a major driver of deforestation, which roughly accounts for an additional 17 percent of global GHG emissions (IPCC, 2007b). This is why agriculture is included in the study on the drivers of deforestation, which was requested by the UNFCCC’s 17th Conference of the Parties (COP 17) in Cancun to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA). Finally, within food systems, reductions of emissions in some areas could lead to increases elsewhere. For instance, depending on the efficiency of production systems, shorter food chains could reduce transport but increase agricultural emissions. Currently, there are no studies that quantify emissions from the global food system (Garnett, 2011). A study in 2006 estimated that 31 percent of the Euro- pean Union’s GHG emissions were associated with the food system (European Commission 2006). Therefore, when looking at challenges and opportunities to reduce GHG emissions using agriculture, it is paramount to look beyond the farm, vertically into the whole food chain and horizontally across impacted land-uses such as forests.

The main direct sources of GHG emissions in the agricultural sector are not only carbon dioxide (CO2). Ag- riculture is a source of nitrous oxide (N2O), accounting for 58 percent of total emissions, mostly by soils and through the application of fertilizers, and of methane (CH4), accounting for 47 percent of total emissions, es- sentially from livestock and rice cultivation. These emissions are dependent on natural processes and agri- cultural practices, which makes them more difficult to control and measure. On the other hand, agriculture is a key sector that, along with the forestry sector, if managed effectively. can lead to biological carbon capture and storage in biomass and soil, acting as “sinks”. Their management can play an essential role in managing climate change (IPCC, 2007b), especially in the long term (Gitz, 2013).

As agricultural production is projected to increase in developing countries, so are agricultural emissions. IPCC estimates that N2O emissions will increase by 35 - 60 percent by 2030 and CH4 by 60 percent (IPCC, 2007b). The IPCC also projects additional land being converted to agriculture.

There are two ways by which agricultural production2 can contribute to mitigate climate change that are in line with the ‘food security first’ objective. The first way is to improve efficiency by decoupling production growth from emissions growth. This involves reducing emissions per kilogram of food output (included in this cal- culation are the effects of emissions from reduced deforestation per kilogram of food). The second way is to 2 A third way, (last section of the module) would be changes in consumption patterns, a subject that will not be touched upon in within this sourcebook.