--- In May 2011, FAO’s Agriculture & Consumer Protection Department organized the international congress ‘Save ---

16 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK All along food chains, from agricultural production, transport, conservation, processing, cooking and con- sumption, there are potential areas for improving energy efficiency (FAO, 2011c). In Africa, 90 percent of the extracted wood is used for domestic purposes, mostly cooking. Improved energy-saving cooking stoves can contribute to reduce deforestation. However, trade-offs may need to be made between reducing losses and reducing energy consumption, especially for fresh perishable products, such as meat, dairy products, fish, fruits and vegetables. Consumption of perishable products, which often require cold chains and rapid transport, is increasing. Analyses of food losses and waste should therefore encompass the whole food chain to be able to consider all impacts and all potential solutions. For instance, processing fresh products transported over long distances into less perishable products can reduce foods losses and GHG emissions resulting from conservation and transport, as slower methods of transport can be used.

System efficiency A change of practice in one component of a given system generally impacts the whole system. So it is not only a single technique or practice that has to be considered but the system as a whole, at the farm and household level and beyond the farm gate. Box 1.1 provides an example of the various consequences of the introduction of the UDP technique in Bangladesh.

Most of the changes in resource use of one factor of production impact on the use of other factors. Therefore, from a ‘GHG efficiency’ perspective, we need to assess the trade-offs between increasing resource efficiency regarding one or other input, for example, increasing yield per hectare through increased use of fertilizers.

Thus, for improvements involving variations of several ‘emitting’ factors, a comprehensive assessment is needed, using life cycle analysis methodologies or GHG accounting tools.

As seen in the example of UDP in Bangladesh (Box 1.1), changes towards more resource efficiency, even through the introduction of a single new technique, can have major economic and social impacts which, in turn have impacts on food security, especially in terms of access to food. Whatever the ‘efficiency’ consid- ered, there is a need to look at the allocation of factors and at the issue of scale. Indeed, production effi- ciency, GHG-efficiency, economic efficiency and food security do not always go hand in hand. For instance, to increase the workforce in the mix of factors of production might go against economic efficiency at the farm level, but may have a positive effect on food security. In that respect, efficiency should be assessed inside a system, at various scales and from various perspectives.

More resilient systems5 Climate change will profoundly affect, in any given place, the conditions under which agricultural activities are undertaken. It will affect existing risks and add new risks and uncertainties. As pointed out by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition (HLPE, 2012a), models cannot project climate change 5 This section draws heavily on Gitz V. & Meybeck A. 2012. Risks, vulnerabilities and resilience in a context of climate change. FAO/OECD Workshop: Building Resilience for Adaptation to Climate Change in the Agriculture Sector, Rome, Italy, 23-24 April 2012.

Box 1.4 The Save Food Global Initiative In May 2011, FAO’s Agriculture & Consumer Protection Department organized the international congress ‘Save Food!’ in partnership with Interpack/Messe Düsseldorf - a global player on trade fair organization, including the food and packaging industry. Speakers, stakeholders and high-level policy makers in the agriculture, food and packaging sectors from across the globe, signed a joint declaration to show their commitment to the goals of Save Food. The partnership launched the SAVE FOOD Initiative, which is a joint campaign to fight global food losses and waste.

The Initiative aims at networking among stakeholders in industry, politics and research, encouraging dialogue and helping to develop solutions to food losses and waste along the food value chain. One of its objectives is to enlist the support of industry in initiating and sponsoring its own SAVE FOOD projects.

Source: Save Food Initiative, 2013