--- Source: UNEP, 2010 ---

424 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK There are opportunities for CSA to build on the growing resources available for multi-hazard risk assessment and mapping. The Probabilistic Risk Assessment Initiative (CAPRA) is an example of a state-of-the-art, open- source multi-hazard tool for risk assessment and visualization, with a platform that integrates databases with exposure and physical vulnerability data. It facilitates the evaluation of risk in terms of physical damage and direct economic and human losses in standard risk metrics to visualize hazards and risk on GIS. CAPRA was developed by Latin American experts and governments with the support of the Central American Coordination Centre for Disaster Prevention in partnership with a number of international organizations. Another available resource is the large collection of geospatial information on disaster risks for Pacific Island countries that is accessible through the Pacific Risk Information System (PacRIS) platform. PacRIS includes detailed country- specific information on hazards, assets, population and risks for 15 countries in the region. It also contains the most comprehensive analysis of building, infrastructure and cash crop exposure (World Bank, 2012).

Figure 15.6 Distribution and location of coastal ecosystems GIS mapping and analysis assisted in the computation of exposure to storm surge and flooding associated with tropical cyclones. The analysis included population distribution, infrastructure and other exposed assets. Remote sensing used high resolution satellite images and aerial photographs from 1968 to determine the types and distribution of coastal ecosystems, especially coral and sea grasses. These images and photographs were also used in the analysis of coastline erosion due to tropical cyclones and rising sea levels. An ensemble of six widely-used, numerical models were applied to assess the range of shoreline retreat of Negril beaches under various rates of sea level rise and storm surges. Multiple regression analyses were used to identify the positive influence of coral reefs and sea grass meadows on the observed beach erosion patterns along the Negril coastline.

Estimations based on global projections of long-term or accelerated sea level rise (ASLR) together with local predictions of extreme storm waves and surges showed that by 2060, the combination of ASLR and extreme wave surges will have a devastating impact on Negril’s beaches and the coastal infrastructure behind it. This has significant implications for risk reduction and adaptation planning. RiVAMP was intended to be used for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) with similar risks as Jamaica, and holds potential for other island states highly exposed to rising sea levels.

Source: UNEP, 2010