--- Sources: Centre for Development and Environment, 2008; ---

431
MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience
DRR and climate change adaptation both acknowledge one vital area: the importance of an ecosystem
approach and sustainable natural resource management in strengthening resilience (see also Module 2
on landscape approach and management of ecosystems). DRR recognizes the inherent interconnected-
ness between the environment and natural hazards (UNISDR, 2004b). Deforestation, the degradation of
catchments and watersheds, the degradation of land and desertification, the depletion of reefs and coastal
ecosystems (especially of corals and mangroves) reduce nature’s defence capacity against climate-related
hazards and aggravate the impact of disasters such as floods, landslides, storm surges, hurricanes and
drought (FAO, 2011b). In upland watersheds, deforestation and destruction of the protective cover of veg-
etation can accelerate soil erosion, reduce the soil’s water-retention capacity and make sloping areas more
prone to flooding and landslides. Eroded material may be carried downhill into rivers and streams, choking
channels with gravel, sand and sediments. This can influence the frequency and severity of flooding and
increase downstream damage (UNESCAP, 1997). Disasters in turn contribute to ecosystem degradation
and loss, such as deforestation, declining rangeland quality, salinisation of soils and reduced biodiversity.
On the island of Sumatra, the 2004 Asian Tsunami damaged approximately 20 percent of sea grass beds;
25-35 percent of wetlands; about 60 000 hectares of agricultural land; nearly 49 000 hectares of coastal
forests: and 32 000 hectares of mangroves (UNEP, 2005; UNEP, 2007). Increased environmental degrada-
Box 15.7
Building the resilience and adaptive capacity of potatoes in the Andes
In some regions of the world, climate change is expected to increase plant diseases and pests that affect potato
production. This phenomenon is already being observed in some areas. Late blight, the fungus responsible for the
Irish potato famine in the 1800s, is expected to expand into previously unaffected areas. In addition, increases in
temperature will put additional pressure on the potato’s wild relatives. By the year 2055, 16-22 percent of all wild
potato species will be threatened with extinction. This is an urgent problem given the importance of wild relatives as
gene pools for breeding new varieties. Potatoes constitute the fourth most important food crop after rice, wheat and
maize. They are vital to the diets and livelihoods of millions of people.
Although Andean communities have demonstrated their resilience to adverse weather and changing environments,
additional assistance can help strengthen this capacity. This assistance can also bridge science and traditional
knowledge and generate innovative solutions. A project by Association Andes supports Andean potato farmers
through the protection of traditional knowledge and conservation efforts that prevent the disappearance of potato
varieties from local fields. This ensures farmers have more options for dealing with the impact of climate change.
The project includes the following:
• conservation of 1 345 accessions of local potatoes through the Potato Park communities;
• establishment of a database of native potatoes, traditional knowledge and climate change;
• collection of information on the effects of climate change on the cultivation of local potato varieties;
• documentation of traditional knowledge about climate change and extreme events; and
• transfer of land for the construction of the Centre for Traditional Knowledge and Native Potatoes in the Potato Park.

Another new potato breeding initiative in Bolivia is helping local farmers cope with the increasingly shorter rainy
seasons and the resulting declines in yields. The project, implemented by the International Potato Center (IPC) and
the Fundación para Promoción e Investigación de Productos Andinos breeds potato varieties that are better adapted
to the short rainy season without any loss in yield. With local farmers, the project tests new varieties in the field
under real conditions.
The IPC, together with local organizations, is evaluating the tolerance to water and temperature stress of the genetic
resources of its potato collection and those of new varieties that are being bred. The IPC can draw on the world’s
largest genetic reservoir of potato varieties. Its gene bank contains 5 000 distinct types of cultivated potatoes and
more than 2 000 wild relatives of the potato belonging to around 140 wild species. The goal is to identify the desired key
characteristics and genes that determine tolerance to abiotic stress. Climate change and other factors that increase
pressure on ecosystems are threatening the existence of many wild relatives. The establishment and maintenance of
gene banks is intended to curb the loss of this diversity in varieties. To date, the IPC has repatriated over 400 native
potatoes varieties among communities across the Andes. The long-term goal is to establish community gene banks
to ensure that the genetic resources underpinning the food supply are secured.
Sources: Centre for Development and Environment, 2008;
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, 2011