--- Asfaw, S. & Lipper, L. ---

187 MODULE 6: Conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture References Asfaw, S. & Lipper, L. 2011. Economics of PGRFA management for adaptation to climate change: a review of select- ed literature. FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture Background Study Paper No. 60.

Bakos, J. 1964. Comparative testing of common carp strains at Fish Culture Research Institute, Szarvas (in Hun- garian), Halászat.

Bakos, J. & Gorda, S. 1995. Genetic improvement of common carp strains using intraspecific hybridization. Aqua- culture, 129: 183–186.

Bakos, J. & Gorda, S. 2001. Genetic resources of common carp at the Fish Culture Research Institute. Szar- vas, Hungary. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No. 417. Rome, FAO. 106p.

Bakos J., Varadi, L., Gorda, S. & Jeney, Z. 2006. Lessons from the breeding program on common carp in Hungary.

In R.W. Ponzoni, B.O. Acosta, A.G. Ponniah, eds. Development of aquatic animal genetic improvement and dissemination programs: current status and action plans, pp. 27–33. WorldFish Center Conferences Proceed- ings. (available at http://www.worldfishcenter.org/resource_centre/Development%20of%20Aquatic_1.pdf) Beed, F., Benedetti, A., Cardinali, G., Chakraborty, S., Dubois, T., Garrett, K. & Halewood, M. 2011. Climate change and micro-organism genetic resources for food and agriculture: state of knowledge, risks and opportuni- ties. Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture Background Study Paper No. 57.

Bioversity International. 2013. Seeds for needs project. (available at http://www.bioversityinternational.org/ research/sustainable_agriculture/seeds_for_needs.html) British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations. 2008. Amendments to the standards: climate based upward elevation changes. (available at http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/code/cfstandards/ amendmentNov08.htm) Burlingame, B., Mouillé, B. & Charrondière, R. 2009. Nutrients, bioactive non-nutrients and anti-nutrients in potatoes. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 22(6): 494–502.

FAO. 2007. The state of the world’s animal genetic resources for food and agriculture, B. Rischkowsky & D. Pill- ing, eds. FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. Rome.

FAO. 2009. Plant genetic resources: use them or lose them. FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture Factsheet. Rome.

FAO. 2010a. Adding value to livestock diversity: marketing to promote local breeds and improve livelihoods.

League for Pastoral Peoples and Endogenous Livestock Development, Life Network, International Union for Conservation of Nature & FAO. Rome.

FAO. 2010b. Practical regional concerns involving the development and distribution of improved aquaculture seed.

Committee for Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture of Africa.

FAO. 2010c. Second report on the state of the world’s plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. FAO Com- mission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. Rome.

FAO. 2012a. Status and trends of animal genetic resources: 2012. Intergovernmental Technical Working Group on Animal Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. Rome.