--- Page 307 ---

294 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Improve performance: 4.Targeted (vision, right stakeholders and strategy driven) This principle refers to strategic actions to improve the performance of the chain, which should firstly include a vision and have realistic and quantifiable objectives that address the triple bottom line as well as be in line with national development plans. In addition, these objectives also need to be acceptable and inspiring to stakeholders as well as to generate buy-in, political will and entrepreneurial drive. Secondly, the strategy needs to involve the right stakeholders (inclusiveness) so that poverty and hunger can be ad- dressed not on a short-term basis, but in a sustainable manner. Thirdly, strategic actions need to be under- taken where the largest impact can be achieved in economic, social and environmental terms. 5.Upgrading focused In order to improve the performance of a value chain, upgrading has to be undertaken. The aim of upgrad- ing is to realise one, two or all of the triple bottom line objectives: 1) increasing profits through efficiency measures or value addition; 2) increasing inclusiveness by improving social impact; 3) reducing environ- mental impacts of the entire chain. Upgrading can take place in different forms, e.g. a technology, organi- zational, network, institutional, process, product/market or a functional upgrade. Successful upgrading involves the integration of individual upgrades along the chain as well as actions to improve the enabling environment. 6.Scalable This principle aims to achieve impact at scale. Scale is crucial, because a larger impact is highly desirable, but also because upgrading is often enabled due to an increase in scale. 7.Multilateral Improving the entire performance of a value chain requires a coordinated and collaborated effort by the private sector, as the driver in the value addition process, and the public sector, including donors and civil society, as facilitators of the enabling environment.

Measure performance: 8.Economic sustainability Refers to a value chain performance that provides equal or higher profits or incomes for each stakeholder. 9.Social sustainability Refers to a value chain performance where additional value is created (additional profits and wage incomes) that benefits a large number of poor households, which is equitably distributed along the chain and has no impacts that would be socially unacceptable, including no socially objectionable practices like unhealthy work conditions, child labour, violation of strong cultural traditions, etc. 10. Environmental sustainability Refers to a value chain performance where the additional value created does not permanently deplete natu- ral resources (water, soil, air, biodiversity). 11.2 Sustainable and inclusive food value chains in practice: the case of food losses and waste Food is lost and wasted at every stage within the food value chain. In medium- and high-income countries, food is largely lost and wasted after the farm gate and in particular at the retail and consumption stage, while in low-income countries food is mostly lost during the production, post-harvest and processing stages of the food chain and much less is wasted at the consumer level (FAO, 2011b; Hodges et al., 2010).

One of the major components of SIFVCD is reverse channels or backward channels. Waste streams are cre- ated at every level of the agri-food value chain and it is important that these are managed appropriately, so as to reduce the waste stream impact on economic, social and environmental aspects. The strategy of the 3 Rs (reduction, reuse and recycle) is commonly adopted, especially the reduction strategy. As a result of the large quantities of food loss and waste that occur at many levels of the agri-food value chains, food losses and waste need to be considered as an integral part of SIFVCD that can successfully lead to CSA.