--- Source: adapted from Daw ---

258 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Impact area Potential responses Post-harvest, value addition Extreme event effects on infrastructure/ communities Early warning systems and education; new or improved physical defences; accommodation to change; rehabilitation and disaster response Reduced/ more variable yields, supply timing Wider sourcing of products, change species, add value, reduce losses, costs; more flexible location strategies to access materials; improve communications and distribution systems; diversify livelihoods Temperature, precipitation, other effects on processing Better forecasting, information; change or improve processes and technologies Trade and market shocks Better information services; diversify markets and products Source: adapted from Daw et al., 2009; De Silva and Soto, 2009.

Note: Some adaptations to declining and variable yields may directly risk exacerbating overexploitation of fisheries by increasing fishing pressure or impacting habitats.

Decisions as to which options to select will depend on the location and scale of change; the impacts and the perception of their effects; and the cost, complexity and time required to implement countermeasures. Priori- ties may be given to small and inexpensive changes in systems or practices that can bring about additional risk reduction. However, if larger climate change risks emerge, these actions may quickly become redundant, or more dangerously, offer a false sense of security. In these circumstances, when time may be required to de- velop new techniques and/or gain access to investments required, a more strategic approach may be needed.

However, early over-investment in expensive forms of protection may pose dangers in that they may deprive communities of important financial resources and protect only some sectors of the population. In some cases, tradeoffs may be required to support decisions to protect and strengthen one area, community or activity, while leaving others relatively unprotected. Over longer periods, infrastructure development and the relocation of people towards safer or more attractive areas may be required.

Tables 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4 extend these concepts to show how climate change responses may be developed in different fisheries, aquaculture and associated sectors, depending on the potential level of severity of change.

The levels of disturbance are categorized as: minor disruptions, which are relatively easily to accommodate through normal patterns of operations, but may merit some adjustments to reduce risks and impacts; signifi- cant disruptions, which are sufficient in frequency and magnitude to require adjustments outside the normal patterns of operations, but usually only require modifications to these familiar patterns; and major disruptions whose frequency and/or magnitude expose the system to unsupportable levels of risk and for which it is im- perative to make modifications, some but not all of which could be based on existing systems.

In the broader response to uncertain vectors of change, climate-smart disaster risk management approaches are also relevant. This approach originated in post-disaster interventions (e.g. storms, floods or tsunamis) where there was the need to reduce or manage similar risks. However, the approach can be applied much more proactively and can be used to anticipate and respond to the complete climate change impact profile in a given context. In this way, better links to response needs can be made in areas where storms are also associ- ated with sea level surges and salinisation or the destruction of nursery habitats (read more about disaster risk reduction in Module 10).