--- CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK ---

x CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK energy and water sector development is essential to capitalize on potential synergies, reduce trade-offs and optimize the use of natural resources and ecosystem services. To address this complex task and support mem- ber countries, FAO’s different departments have worked together to articulate the concept of CSA. In carrying out this work, the Organization provides guidance about the practices, technologies, policies and financing that are required to achieve a productive, resilient and sustainable agriculture sector.

This approach also aims to strengthen livelihoods and food security, especially of smallholders, by improving the management and use of natural resources and adopting appropriate methods and technologies for the production, processing and marketing of agricultural goods. To maximize the benefits and minimize the trade- offs, CSA takes into consideration the social, economic, and environmental context where it will be applied.

Repercussions on energy and local resources are also assessed. A key component is the integrated landscape approach that follows the principles of ecosystem management and sustainable land and water use.

CSA seeks to support countries in putting in place the necessary policy, technical and financial means to main- stream climate change considerations into agricultural sectors and provide a basis for operationalizing sustain- able agricultural development under changing conditions. Innovative financing mechanisms that link and blend climate and agricultural finance from public and private sectors are a key means for implementation, as are the integration and coordination of relevant policy instruments and institutional arrangements. The scaling up of climate-smart practices will require appropriate institutional and governance mechanisms to disseminate infor- mation, ensure broad participation and harmonize policies. It may not be possible to achieve all the CSA objec- tives at once. Context-specific priorities need to be determined, and benefits and tradeoffs evaluated.

CSA is not a single specific agricultural technology or practice that can be universally applied. It is an approach that requires site-specific assessments to identify suitable agricultural production technologies and practices.

This approach: 1. addresses the complex interrelated challenges of food security, development and climate change, and identifies integrated options that create synergies and benefits and reduce trade-offs; 2. recognizes that these options will be shaped by specific country contexts and capacities and by the par- ticular social, economic, and environmental situation where it will be applied; 3. assesses the interactions between sectors and the needs of different involved stakeholders; 4. identifies barriers to adoption, especially among farmers, and provides appropriate solutions in terms of policies, strategies, actions and incentives; 5. seeks to create enabling environments through a greater alignment of policies, financial investments and institutional arrangements; 6. strives to achieve multiple objectives with the understanding that priorities need to be set and collective decisions made on different benefits and trade-offs; 7. should prioritize the strengthening of livelihoods, especially those of smallholders, by improving access to services, knowledge, resources (including genetic resources), financial products and markets; 8. addresses adaptation and builds resilience to shocks, especially those related to climate change, as the magnitude of the impacts of climate change has major implications for agricultural and rural develop- ment; 9. considers climate change mitigation as a potential secondary co-benefit, especially in low-income, agricultural-based populations; 10. seeks to identify opportunities to access climate-related financing and integrate it with traditional sources of agricultural investment finance.