--- “The Case for Climate-Smart Agriculture” ---

xi Executive summary CSA brings together practices, policies and institutions that are not necessarily new but are used in the context of climatic changes, which are unfamiliar to farmers, herders and fishers. What is also new is the fact that the multiple challenges faced by agriculture and food systems are addressed simultaneously and holistically, which helps avoid counterproductive policies, legislation or financing.

CSA implementation and the role of the sourcebook There has been a rapid uptake of the term CSA by the international community, national entities and local institutions. However, implementing this approach is challenging, partly due to a lack of tools and experience.

Climate-smart interventions are highly location-specific and knowledge-intensive. Considerable efforts are re- quired to develop the knowledge and capacities to make CSA a reality. In large part, these are the same efforts required for achieving sustainable agricultural development which have been advocated over past decades, yet still insufficiently realized on the ground. CSA offers an opportunity to revitalize these efforts, overcome adoption barriers, while also adjusting them to the new realities of climate change. Organizations, educational establishments and other entities have started to fill these gaps, but information is still fragmented. A partner- ship between UN agencies (FAO, IFAD, UNEP, WB, WFP) and other organizations (CGIAR/CCAFS) has been cre- ated to address knowledge gaps and support countries in the implementation of climate-smart approaches.

The purpose of the sourcebook is to further elaborate the concept of CSA and demonstrate its potential, as well as limitations. It aims to help decision makers at a number of levels (including political administrators and natural resource managers) to understand the different options that are available for planning, policies and investments and the practices that are suitable for making different agricultural sectors, landscapes and food systems more climate-smart. This sourcebook is a reference tool for planners, practitioners and policy mak- ers working in agriculture, forestry and fisheries at national and subnational levels. The sourcebook indicates some of the necessary ingredients required to achieve a climate-smart approach to the agricultural sectors, including existing options and barriers.

This sourcebook is divided into three main sections, which addresses the main following topics: • Section A “The Case for Climate-Smart Agriculture” consists of two modules establishing a concep- tual framework and is targeted to a broad audience. Module 1 explains the rationale for CSA and module 2 focuses on the adoption of a landscape approach. • Section B “Improved Technologies and Approaches for Sustainable Farm Management” is divided in nine Modules. It is targeted primarily to the needs of planners and practitioners and analyzes what is- sues need to be addressed in the different sectors, in terms of water (Module 3), soils (Module 4), energy (Module 5) and genetic resources (Module 6) for up-scaling of practices of crop production (Module 7), livestock (Module 8), forestry (Module 9) and fisheries and aquaculture (Module 10) along sustainable and inclusive food value chains (Module 11). • Section C “Enabling frameworks” encompasses seven Modules, targeted to policy makers, providing guidance on what institutional (Module 12), policy (Module 13) and finance (Module 14) options are avail- able. It further provides information on links with disaster risk reduction (Module 15) and utilization of safety nets (Module 16) and also illustrates the key role of capacity development (Module 17) and assess- ments and monitoring (Module 18).