--- Page 42 ---

29 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries trients. While, globally, enough food is being produced to feed the entire word, one-third of it is lost or wasted, and low incomes and problems of distribution mean that accessibility to food is still out of reach for one out of six people on our planet. By 2050, food production has to increase, both in quantity, quality, and diversity, espe- cially in developing countries. Population and income growth will drive an ever- increasing demand, especially in developing countries (Lutz and Samir, 2010; Cirera and Masset, 2010; Foresight, 2011a; Foresight, 2011b).

Assuming these trends continue, FAO estimates that production has to increase by 60 percent between now and 2050, especially in developing countries (Bruinsma, 2009; Conforti, 2011). Agriculture is also an essen- tial driver of economic growth, particularly in rural areas and least developed countries. At the national level boosting agricultural production stimulates overall economic growth and development, particularly in those countries with a high economic dependence on agriculture. According to the World Bank (2008), investment in agriculture is particularly efficient in creating new jobs. Agricultural and rural development acts as an engine for sustainable economic development, making an effective contribution to national economic growth. At the community level, agricultural development increases farm productivity, reduces food deficits, increases food surpluses and raises incomes. Improved agriculture production provides opportunities to sustainably reduce poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition and thereby improves livelihoods.

At the same time, food production and consumption already exerts a considerable impact on the environment (UNEP, 2010; FAO, 2012b). Food systems rely on resources, especially land, water, biodiversity, and fossil fuels, which are becoming ever more fragile and scarce.

Agriculture is essential for a green economy. In fact, FAO considers that there can be no green economy with- out agriculture. This is why FAO proposed “Greening Economy with Agriculture” as the basis key message for Rio+20 (FAO, 2012b).

Climate-smart agriculture contributes to the goals of making sustainable development concrete. It integrates the three dimensions of sustainable development in addressing food security and climate concerns in a for- ward-looking perspective. It is guided by the need for more resource efficiency and resilience. These principles are also central in the Rio + 20 outcome document8, which recognizes resource efficiency as key to a green economy and affirms the need to enhance agriculture’s resilience.

The green economy and CSA share the common goal of integrating the three dimensions of sustainable devel- opment. Both make sustainable development tangible by focusing on issues that can and must be addressed right now in local communities but that have global, long-term consequences.

CSA brings together global and local concerns, climate change to be addressed globally, climate change to get adapted to locally; and first of all, food security, which has to be addressed both locally and globally. To do so it brings together practices, policies and institutions, which are not necessarily new. What is new is the harmo- nization and synchronization needed of practices and policies in order to address multiple challenges, faced by agriculture and food systems, now and for the future. What is also new is the objective of avoiding contradictory and conflicting policies by internally managing trade-offs and synergies in the pursuit of multiple objectives.

Food security and natural resources: sustainable intensification CSA takes into account the four dimensions of food security, availability, accessibility, utilization and stability9.

Still, the entry point and the emphasis is on production, on farmers, on increasing productivity and income, and on ensuring their stability. As such it is centered on the key dimension of food security, - availability, which is associated with stability. It also has much to do with raising and stabilizing incomes of smallholders, and thus with accessibility to food. Diversification of production is a powerful way to increase efficiency and resilience; it is also an essential path towards more balanced and nutritious diets. 8 Id paragraphs 108-118. 9 Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life”. (World Food Summit, 1996)