--- Page 22 ---

9 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries The green economy is driven by the idea that, in the long run, given the increasing scarcity of resources, physi- cal resource efficiency and economic efficiency will become closer, due to market fundamentals and through policies, which would factor in environmental and social externalities (positive and negative) of input use and production. Agriculture needs to produce more with resources (land, water, energy and nutrients) that are be- coming scarcer and thus more expensive. However, given the relative prices of the various inputs, production factors and outputs, this is not an easy thing to achieve, especially in smallholder farming systems. Evidence shows that farmers economize in their use of inputs in reaction to increased prices (OECD, 2011). A study of how US farmers reacted to higher energy and fertilizer prices in 2006 (Harris et al., 2008) showed that 23 per- cent of commercial farms reduced their usage of both energy and fertilizers. To reduce energy consumption, they used machines less intensively and serviced engines more frequently. Lower usage of fertilizers was also achieved through greater use of soil testing, precision application and changes of crops.

Increasing efficiency in the use of resources is also one of the driving principles of CSA. GHG emissions from agriculture are linked to its use of resources. Three production factors have an important influence on total agricultural GHG emissions: (i) area, since converting land into cultivations would require either deforestation or grasslands being converted to croplands, which would induce higher CO2 emissions; (ii) fertilizers, whose production is an important source of CO2 and which at the field level translate into nitrous oxide emissions; and (iii) livestock, which is an important source of methane and nitrous oxide emissions. Physical capital, such as buildings and machines are also a factor, both directly by energy use and indirectly by their produc- tion. Everything else being equal, increasing the efficiency in the use of one of these production factors de- creases the emissions intensity of output. As irrigation often demands considerable energy, water efficiency is another key factor for increasing production, adapting to climate change and reducing emissions.

Resource efficiency needs to be improved in every type of food system. Studies using the results of detailed on farm energy audits realized in France have shown that energy consumption per kilogram of output can be extremely variable between farms. It has, for instance, been shown (Bochu et al., 2010) that the most efficient dairy farms consume per unit of output half of the energy consumed by the less efficient farms. Results of more than 400 farms have been analysed and categorized according to the importance of corn silage in the system (1-10 percent, 10-20 percent, 20-30 percent, more than 30 percent of the feed). It appears that vari- ability within each of these categories is more important than between categories, and that in every category the more efficient farms use less than half of the energy used by the less efficient ones. This is also true in organic farms. This means that, no matter what the system, there can be important improvements in man- agement practices.

Increase resource efficiency in plant production As agriculture is an important driver of deforestation, reducing agricultural expansion through sustainable intensification on already cultivated land could have a major mitigation effect. The HLPE considers that ending most conversion of forest to cultivation should be a mitigation priority.

Studies show that, at the global level, from 1961 to 2005, crop production increased by over 160 percent, mostly as a result of 135 percent yield increases, with only 27 percent increases in crop area (Burney et al., 2010). This intensification allowed farmers to increase food production while emitting the equivalent of 590 gigatons of CO2 less than what would have been emitted by expanding the area under cultivation on the basis of assum- ing 1961 yields. They conclude that land use change emissions (even avoided ones) are much more important than direct emissions from agricultural systems. Therefore, improvement of crop yields should be prominent in any mitigation strategy. Moreover, these improvements will also contribute to preserving forest sinks and maintaining their capacity to store carbon over the long-term (Gitz and Ciais, 2004).

Other studies show that across the tropics, between 1980 and 2000, more than 55 percent of new agricultural land came at the expense of intact forests and another 28 percent came from disturbed forests (Gibbs et al., 2010). Considering the role of agriculture as a driver of deforestation, sustainable intensification should also play a part in Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) programmes.