--- Page 133 ---

120
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
4.4 Successful examples of soil management practices
for climate-smart agriculture with a focus on resilience
Integrated soil-crop-water management
The sound management of soil-crop-water interrelations can increase SOM levels, improve the soil’s nutri-
ent retention capacity and enhance soil biota. This integrated management can provide optimum physical
and biological conditions for crop production (food, fibre, fodder and trees).
In cropping systems, good management practices would include:
• Direct seeding (no-tillage); improved protective soil cover through cover crops, crop residues or mulch;
and crop diversification through rotations (e.g. incorporating deep rooting plants and perennials pasture
leys for integrated crop-livestock systems).
Burning of crop residues should be avoided by all means.
• Integrated soil fertility management (inorganic and organic) to alleviate the problem of low nutrient
retention capacity, which is more pronounced in tropical and subtropical soils where there is a quick
turnover of SOM and organic compounds. Agronomic systems should be adopted that increase the
protection of carbon and nitrogen from rapid mineralization. Integrated soil fertility management is a
strategy used worldwide in intensified cropping systems to combine inputs of organic matter (mulch,
compost, crop residues, green manure) with fertilizers to address or prevent macro- and micro-nutrient
deficiencies.
• Precise management of nitrogen. The recycling of nitrogen on the farm by using manure and nitrogen
fixing plants is the predominant technique used in organic and low external input agriculture to en-
hance soil quality and provide nutrients. When using this technique, proper timing and management
are essential. Nutrients need to be delivered to the plant in times of peak demand. Organic and green
manures, as well as nitrogen from legumes, can be managed very precisely through crop rotations that
include cover and catch crops (for more details see Thorup-Kristensen et al., 2003).
• Herbicides and other weed management options.
• Physical conservation structures (such as bunds, drainage).
• Irrigation, partial irrigation where needed or possible (see Module 3 on water management).
• Robust sources of information and extension that are tailored to local conditions.

In grazing systems, SOM can be increased through controlled grazing, which reduces vegetation degradation
and restores grassland diversity. Reducing burning to the absolute minimum also increases SOM. However,
in common property lands, burning is often a preferred strategy for enhancing phosphorus and encouraging
young growth for grazing animals (also see Module 8 on livestock). Pasture cropping, a practice where an
annual crop is grown out-of-phase with perennial pasture, builds soil at higher rates than perennial pas-
tures alone. This is due to the year-round transfer of soluble carbon to the root-zone and the maintenance
of the humification process in the non-growth period of the perennial (Cluff and Seis, 1997).