--- Page 72 ---

59 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems to maximize soil disturbance and graze a different section of the block in use each day to eliminate overgrazing. The immediate results included: improved land health, livestock survival and productivity, youth involvement and community unity. The successful land restoration can be attributed to the focus on enhancing the four ecosystem processes that together determine ecosystem health and productivity: water cycle, mineral cycle, energy flow and plant and living communities. Much of the training focuses on ‘eco-literacy’, combined with techniques for low-stress handling of large herds. This has restored the traditional value of herding and herders in the eyes of the community. Not only does this process reverse land degradation, it is also reversing a long-term trend of carbon release from soil to atmosphere. Given their expanse, the planet’s grasslands hold massive potential for climate change mitigation.

However, the above approach does not guarantee success, as there are a number of social factors that present barriers to adoption. A major challenge arose when community members resisted their leaders’ decision to adopt the plan throughout their lands. The goal-setting and future visioning component of the programme was then introduced to the leadership.

This component requires an articulation of the quality of life desired: what needs to be produced or created (tangible and intangible) to attain that quality of life; and what future resource base is needed to meet these needs. The value of this exercise is two-fold; it allows deep self-reflection and it guides and encourages more socially, ecologically and economically-sound decisions.

One startling result of applying the visioning tool was that the leadership realized that current management structures were producing opposite results than what they desired. It was decided that a reorganization of the community management structure was necessary. This process resulted in the formation of ‘village’ management forums written into their constitution, whereby primary responsibility for all management actions was placed in the hands of a Village Forum, with the overall community management bodies playing a supporting rather than directing role as they had previously tended to do. This resulted in a shift from a top-down to a bottom-up structure and a pooling of the previously separate management committees for different issues (e.g. water, education, grazing) under the single village management body. It all came about when the community identified that the separation of activities that were in fact closely connected, resulted in activities that were undermining each other.

These changes allowed members to adopt improved practices while the programme continued to focus on facilitating building capacity of the new Village Forums, with each village forming its own ‘future-vision’ to guide social, economic and environmentally-related decisions. Challenges (mainly social) constantly arise, but discussions using the visioning tool usually facilitates appropriate solutions; a process which communities have found empowering. As many elders have commented: “we never thought we had a choice about our future.” Lessons learned and recommendations The following are the most fundamental lessons from Laikipia: • Land degradation is primarily a social issue rather than a technical one. • Creating the ‘transformation process’ involves a number of key, interconnected elements that have at least four different characteristics: personal; relational; collective, and systemic (structural). Not enough effort is put into the social aspects and their synchronization with the technical issues. • Social transformation is not something someone else can do for you. This changes the role of interventionists from solution-providers to problem-posers and also requires that the intervention staff connect psychologically with communities. In pastoralist settings, it makes sense to have pastoralist intervention staff. • No one issue can be sustainably tackled in isolation. Each situation compromises a complex ‘whole’ composed of interconnected social, environmental and economic dimensions. Only alignment of all aspects can bring lasting, positive results: aligning the ‘what’ with the ‘who’, ‘how’, ‘when’ and ‘where.’ • Every situation is unique. Common sense principles and processes, rather than off-the-shelf ‘fixes’, put in the hands of managers rather than experts give the flexible application necessary to respond to each unique situation based on willingness and ability.