--- Page 58 ---

45 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems 2.1 Why is a landscape approach needed for achieving CSA?

Governing landscapes for the multiple objectives of CSA CSA provides opportunities, but also presents considerable challenges. To seize these opportunities and meet these challenges, a more holistic, integrated approach in which all stakeholders participate actively is re- quired. An integrated approach ensures greater efficiency in the use of resources and more sustainable man- agement of natural and human-created processes in the landscape. Production systems must be incorporated into landscapes, in ways that capitalize on natural biological processes, recycle waste and residues and create integrated and diversified farming systems. This integration can greatly reduce the pressure on the natural resources and minimize the need for external inputs (e.g. energy, chemical fertilizers and pesticides) and other management interventions.

The landscape approach is key to achieving the multiple objectives of CSA. In a landscape approach, the man- agement of production systems and natural resources covers an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services and small enough so the action can be carried out by the people using the land and producing those services.

A landscape approach builds on the principles of natural resource management systems that recognize the value of ecosystem services to multiple stakeholders. The principles that underpin the landscape approach provide guidance on how to pursue different land-use objectives and livelihood strategies (MEA, 2005). More recently, the term ‘landscape approach’ has been redefined to include societal concerns related to conserva- tion and development trade-offs. It also includes increased integration of poverty alleviation, agricultural pro- duction and food security. The approach puts the emphasis on adaptive management, stakeholder involvement and the simultaneous achievement of multiple objectives (Sunderland, 2012).

Experiences have shown that by managing natural resources in a way that ensures the resilience of eco- systems, it will be possible to reverse natural resource degradation, safeguard agricultural productivity and maintain ecosystem services (e.g. the provision of water, pests and disease control, pollination and climate regulation). Healthy ecosystems are the basis for sustainable agriculture, forestry and fisheries. To achieve healthy ecosystems, participatory and people-centered approaches and management structures are needed.

This approach will simultaneously improve the resilience of production systems and people’s livelihoods.

Current pressures and constraints of the natural resource base All civilizations are based on human-managed farming, forestry and fishery systems. Converting land from forests to fields and pastures has on occasion created more diverse ecosystems. In many areas, however, it has also led to environmental degradation, loss of many vital environmental services and the loss of bio- diversity. To date, agricultural expansion has cleared or converted 70 percent of grasslands; 50 percent of savannahs; 45 percent of temperate deciduous forest; and 27 percent of tropical forests (Foley et al., 2011).

Many current agricultural production systems are based on vast monocultures that rely on a small number of plants and varieties with a very narrow genetic base. The cultivation of these monocultures depends heavily on the use fossil fuels. These systems also fail to close the nutrient cycles. Many production systems are not sustainable because of their environmentally-damaging soil management practices and their wasteful use of water resources. Also, in some agricultural production systems, there is a significant gap between the tech- nical yield potential and actual yields. Because of this untapped potential, pressure to convert forest land to fields and pastures continues to increase.

Based on the current trends, food supply will need to grow by another 60 percent by 2050 to meet the demands of a more populous, more urbanized and more affluent world. At the same time, agricultural production sys- tems will face increasing competition for resources with other sectors. In fact, expanding cities, infrastructure and human activities will infringe on fertile agricultural lands.