--- Potato park in Peru ---

184 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Integrating in situ and ex situ conservation For specific genetic resources, some conservation systems may be more effective than others. However, a complementary conservation strategy that uses a combination of ex situ and in situ techniques is most likely to safeguard genetic diversity. In this conservation strategy, the establishment of on-farm conservation pro- grammes and protected areas is complemented by genebanks and other ex situ conservation systems.

Over the last decade, a number of initiatives at national and international levels have succeeded in promoting on-farm management in farmers’ fields. They have also identified specific sites and priority activities suited for the in situ conservation of crop wild relatives where these wild resources are at risk. One of the operational systems that support such initiatives is the Benefit Sharing Fund of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, which was established as a direct international response to the chal- lenges of climate change and food security. The Treaty’s Multilateral System ensures access to the wide range of plant genetic diversity needed to respond to the ecological and socio-economic challenges faced by agricul- ture. In Peru for example, farming communities have established a potato park, where potato genetic diversity is protected in situ by local indigenous people. These communities have benefited from seed exchange and the ex situ conservation of many varieties that had disappeared from farmers’ fields (see Box 6.9).

Box 6.9 Potato park in Peru Peru’s potato park, a unique 12 000 hectare reserve high in the Andes, near Cusco, was established to conserve the region’s potato biodiversity, a task that has become increasingly difficult as warming climates have altered the growing patterns of some of the area’s local varieties. The reserve is home to six indigenous Quechua communities whose 8 000 residents own the land and control access to local resources, but manage their communal lands jointly for their collective benefit. The communal activities are spearheaded by an organization known as the “guardian of native potatoes”, the Papa Arariwa Collective. ©FAO/Sandro Cespoli In the potato park, which is located within a microcenter of origin for potatoes, a typical family farm grows 20 to 80 varieties. Most of these varieties are grown for local consumption or regional barter. As the climate becomes warmer, local potato farmers have begun experimenting with different varieties at higher altitudes where temperatures are lower.

The farmers are using many varieties that had disappeared from their fields but that had been conserved in the gene bank of the International Potato Center. The Benefit-sharing Fund of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture is working with the local farmers to repatriate varieties from the genebank into their fields.

More than 1 345 varieties can be found in the Potato Park: 779 were collected locally; 410 were repatriated from the International Potato Center; and 157 were received through seed exchanges. The fact that these varieties were disease-free helped increase yields. The popularity of the older potato varieties increased thanks to marketing efforts and the increased attention these varieties received. The conservation of these potato varieties through in situ utilization will provide invaluable support to local communities in adapting to climate change.

Source: Farmers’ Rights, 2013