--- STEP 5. SCOPE FOR SYNERGIES ---

343 MODULE 12: Local institutions STEP 5. SCOPE FOR SYNERGIES Based on the mappings produced in steps 1-4: • Identify what kinds of synergies and collaborations could best bring out the institutional strengths and compensate for identified institutional weaknesses. • Consider how such partnerships could be brokered and mediated. • Bring partners together and jointly map out desired outcomes and strategies for achieving them (Box 12.15 features a tool that could further support such mapping). • Let these synergies guide the project’s progress.

Box 12.16 Net-Map: a hands-on social networking tool ‘Net-Map’, an empirical tool produced by the IFPRI, makes it easier to assess and improve complex governance systems. The tool can be used both as a means for conducting research and as an instrument for organizational development and strategic network planning.

Net-Map’s approach is participatory. Interviewees and interviewers work together to sketch a network map of the actors and stakeholders involved in the situation in question, and map out the connections between them. The aims, motivations and power dynamics between all stakeholders are also assessed collaboratively. These different factors are translated onto the map in three dimensions by building up checkers pieces to demonstrate hierarchies between different actors (these ‘influence towers’ are depicted below). Simple to set up and visually straightforward, Net-Map has been used successfully when working with local communities and at national and international strategic levels.

The tool was originally developed in collaboration with the White Volta River Basin Board (inaugurated in 2006) in rural Ghana. It was designed to enhance the Board’s capacity to realize its large-scale environmental goals by clarifying the interactions between individuals, organizations and networks around its 17 members, which include local leaders, district officials, NGOs and researchers. The tool has been used by a wide range of international organizations since, including the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the World Bank and the World Health Organization (WHO).

Source: IFPRI, 2008; IFPRI, 2009 © E. Schiffer, 2007