--- 2000; SCCA, 2012). An example ---

158 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK On a per calorie of food output basis, China, with its high cropping ratio, extensive irrigation and intensive ferti- lization, now has a more energy-intensive agriculture sector than the United States or the European Union. Af- ter the farming reforms of 1978 in China, nitrogen (half of which comes from inorganic fertilizers) has provided about 60 percent of the nutrient in cropping. Over 80 percent of the country’s protein requirement has been derived from crop production. The agriculture sector is highly dependent on fossil fuels, but has been able to feed about 8.5 people per hectare and up to 15 people in populous provinces. This result is also attributable to a national diet with little animal proteins.

Inefficient use of nitrogen fertilizers leads to losses that are usually above 50 percent and sometimes can amount to 60-70 percent of applied nutrients (Cassman et al., 2002). In many areas, increasing the efficiency of fertilizer application so that it results in optimal plant growth with minimal inputs would significantly improve the energy balance of food production. It would also help protect the environment and cut costs for farmers.

However, in some areas, such as in Africa, reaching optimal energy efficiency in food production may require the application of more fertilizer to increase yields. Curbing soil erosion could be another important method to reduce fertilizer losses.

Water efficiency is becoming a priority in irrigation. However, achieving greater efficiency in irrigation may re- quire more energy. Drip irrigation, for example, which increases the efficiency of water use, requires energy to pressurize the water. Much of the energy needed for irrigation is often used for pumping operations. Extending irrigation in remote areas requires appropriate energy technologies, such as solar powered pumps that can save manual labour in off the energy grid rural areas. Irrigation efficiency can be as high as 95 percent; good field practices have average efficiency rates around 65-75 percent while furrow irrigation can only achieve 30- 40 percent efficiency. In Asia, irrigation efficiency could potentially be doubled (Smil, 2008).

Liquid fuels are usually required for soil preparation. The amount of energy required for this is influenced by weather conditions (wet or dry soils), soil compaction and other factors. The single most energy-consuming operation in a cropping cycle is soil tillage for land preparation, particularly ploughing. Consequently, reduced tillage cropping systems, particularly no-till systems, have become particularly attractive in times of high en- ergy costs. Practices, such as zero tillage used in conservation agriculture, have the potential to bring about significant energy savings that can even reach up to 40-50 percent (Doets et al., 2000; SCCA, 2012). An example from Brazil of these potential savings from conservation agriculture is given in Table 5.4. Energy savings are primarily due to the reduction of external inputs, which are usually energy-intensive.