--- Source: Adapted from FAO, 2011d ---

475 MODULE 17: Capacity development for climate-smart agriculture Table 17.1 Success factors for effective capacity development for CSA Success Factor Explanation CSA Examples Applying a systematic approach across 3-dimensions and develop both technical and functional capacities CD involves three dimensions (3D) which are interlinked: individuals, organizations and the enabling environment. Successful initiatives usually address all three dimensions.

Non-technical (i.e. functional capacities) are increasingly considered a necessary complement to technical CD, as they empower actors to apply the new knowledge/skills effectively, and scale up the intervention’s results.

CD for trans-boundary, integrated water resources management comprises technical and negotiation skills (e.g. support of the Lower Mekong River Commission).

National Ownership through aligning programmes with national priorities National needs and priorities anchored in national ownership, rather than UN agency priorities, should guide interventions. For example, FAO follows country priorities as laid out in Country Programming Frameworks, National Agriculture Sector Plans, Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers, and as per the Aid Effectiveness Agenda. Use national Project Management Unit whenever possible.

Development of national reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) strategies in line with country strategies. See Box 17.3.

Setting up comprehensive CSA policy approaches in Malawi, Zambia and Vietnam Assessing capacities Undertaking a careful assessment of needs to diagnose what and whose capacities need to be developed is a fundamental pre-condition for all successful and sustainable development projects. Such assessments ensure the context is understood and existing capacities and needs are identified, allowing the project or programme to be customized to the local situation.

See Box 17.1 for CSA capacity needs assessments in Kenya and Tanzania.

Anchoring programmes to local or national institutions and systems Sustainable interventions anchor programmes in local or national institutions, national systems, procedures, organizations, and/or budgets are developed to ensure long-term continuity even after external funding for development projects ends.

CSA interventions linked to National Climate Change Commissions or Offices.

Promoting engagement with local & national actors Encouraging national/local involvement in project/programme identification, formulation, implementation and monitoring and the use of participatory communication approaches ensure the endogenous support essential for sustaining projects in the long term.

The formulation of National Climate Action Programmes/ Plans (NAPAs, NAPs, NAMAs) under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) emphasizes this factor. See Box 17.7 on inclusive communication tools.

Using capacity development modalities beyond training Alongside the delivery of training, other successful capacity development modalities include coaching, South-South cooperation, policy support, support to organizational development, creation of networks and convening for national/regional events.

See Box 17.2 on climate change learning approaches in the Philippines and Figure 17.1 Understanding national or regional contexts Paying attention to national, regional and sub-regional contexts helps identify key drivers of change.

REDD + interventions have to be based on a sound understanding of the drivers of deforestation in a country.

A long breath— Giving the CD process time CD takes considerable time, particularly at organizational and policy levels, and it happens gradually. Ensuring a medium to long-term horizon, through different forms, scales or funding mechanisms if necessary, can foster deep-level CD.

The shift in CSA interventions from a project to a programmatic approach supports this Tracking capacity development Although complex and challenging due to its non-linear nature of assessing change, tracking national capacity-related activities across the three dimensions is critical to measure progress. Capacity- related indicators should be an integral part of any programmatic results framework including assessing political commitment at country level.

Transformation to CSA practice is knowledge-intensive, requiring learning and change of practice calling for innovative approaches to track this complex change process.

Source: Adapted from FAO, 2011d