--- vegetable fat. In Australia, Finland, Norway, Canada and also in some ---

308 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK can only change if motivation, ability and opportunity are addressed at the same time. Moreover, there should be an equally attractive alternative opportunity. Thus, an enabling environment should be created in which consumers can make choices, this would involve both promoting and supporting healthy food. It requires sup- portive legislative, regulatory and fiscal policies implemented by governments.

Taxation An example of what governments can do with regards to fiscal policies is to raise taxes regarding food consump- tion. In order for consumers to make more healthy food choices, some governments place taxes on tobacco and alcohol consumption and more recently some countries have started to tax unhealthy food (see Box 11.8).

Raising taxes can have an influence on consumer spending, but it requires taxes to be substantially high in order to be ‘felt’ by consumers. It was estimated that the increase of price on unhealthy food and drinks should be around 20 percent in order to influence consumer consumption, which should also be supported by subsidies on healthy food to shift dietary habits (Campbell, 2012). Some concerns were raised regarding this, namely that the lower income groups spend a relatively larger share of their income on food and thus are more likely to consume unhealthy foods, which are, in general, cheaper. If this measure is adopted, governments should possibly look into compensating these lower income groups for these additional taxes enforced on unhealthy food (Witt, 2011).

Subsidies Governments could also provide subsidies for food that is produced in a resource, energy, water intensive way and stimulate local food production. The European Commission developed in 2011 a ‘Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe’, which outlined efficiency indicators and targets for all key resources – ecosystem services, biodiversity, minerals, metals, water, air, land, soil and marine resources across its 27 members states (Euro- pean Commission, 2011) (see also Module 13 on policy measures supporting transition to CSA).

Other stakeholders The food industry, packaging industry and retailers also have an important role to play. Public-private col- laboration and partnerships among all stakeholders in the areas of environment, agriculture, nutrition, health, education, culture and trade need to be promoted. Cross-sectoral approaches are required to ensure that programme activities and policies adequately promote sustainable consumption and adoption of sustainable diets. There is a need for all stakeholders to undertake action.

Disposal of food stage Adopting a waste management approach is desirable from a food security, economic and environmental per- spective as waste occurs at all stages of the food chain. Waste management is complementary to the CSA approach, because if a certain amount of waste is reused and recovered, it may not need to be disposed at landfills, where the GHG, methane, is produced from waste.

Lansink’s ‘waste management hierarchy’ shows the different types of waste uses. The waste hierarchy includes waste minimization (reduce), reuse, recover (recycling, composting, energy from waste) and safe disposal. It aims to reduce the total amount of waste and save energy and resources and thus increase the efficiency of food systems (Wolsink, 2010; Smith and Ali, 2002).

The following sub-sections focus on reusing waste for human consumption and animal feed, as compost and for energy generation.

Box 11.4 Taxes on unhealthy food In 2011, Denmark introduced, as the first country in the world, a tax on unhealthy foods that have a high content in saturated fats. This ‘fat tax’ or ‘junk food tax’ was later also introduced by Hungary. Through this measure governments try to control obesity levels, which are also increasing rapidly in developing countries. Other countries, like France, tax their food, such as sweets, chocolates, margarine and vegetable fat. In Australia, Finland, Norway, Canada and also in some states of the US, a sales tax is added to soft drinks, sweets and snack foods (Lorek, 2011).