--- Page 208 ---

195 MODULE 7: Climate-smart crop production system 7.1 Introduction Crop production, which is vital to global food security, is being affected by climate change all over the world.

However, the impact is being felt more severely in the more impoverished communities. It has been predicted that over the next decades, billions of people, especially those living in developing countries, will face short- ages of water and food and greater risks to health and life because of climate change. With fewer social, technological and financial resources for adapting to changing conditions, developing countries are the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change (UNFCCC, 2007).

Although some crops in some regions of the world may benefit, the overall impacts of climate change on agri- culture are expected to be negative (IFPRI, 2009). For example, climate variability and the frequency of extreme climatic events, such as droughts and flooding, will affect precipitation. Higher temperatures may affect yields in a negative way and favour the growth of weeds and the proliferation of crop pests. In many areas, rising sea levels also will hamper crop production. Furthermore, crop failures and long-term declines in productions will occur. The impact of climate change will hit developing countries the hardest, and it is in these countries where food security will be most threatened. 7.2 Climate change impacts The successes and failures of crops have always been subject to prevailing environmental factors, and the mechanisms for managing the stresses created by these factors continue to be the subject of extensive stud- ies in a variety of disciplines. Crop production is increasingly vulnerable to risks associated with new and evolving climatic changes. These are variations in environmental conditions that pose significant challenges to farmers, over and beyond those that are experienced ‘normally.’ The planet is facing more extreme weather events, such as heavy precipitation, higher coastal waters, geographic shifts in storm and drought patterns, and warmer temperatures (IPCC, 2012).

Climate change is expected to cause substantial crop reductions in southern Africa (up to 30 percent by 2030 for maize production) and South Asia (up to 10 percent for staples, such as rice, and more than 10 percent for millet and maize) (Lobell et al., 2008). In mid- to high-latitudes, depending on the crop, productivity may in- crease slightly with increases in local mean temperatures of up to 1–3 degrees Celsius. At lower latitudes, crop productivity will decrease even with a relatively minor change in temperature (IPCC, 2007). Localized extreme events and sudden pest and disease outbreaks are already causing greater unpredictability in production from season to season and year to year, and require rapid and adaptable management responses (FAO-PAR, 2011).

By 2050, it is predicted that the global population will be over 9 billion people, increasing the demand for food and other agricultural products. At the same time, the world faces challenges such as land and water scarcity, increased urbanization, and climate change and volatility. Agricultural production remains the main source of income for most rural communities (about 86 percent of rural people - 2.5 billion), who depend on agriculture for their livelihood (World Bank, 2008). Improving adaptation of the agricultural sector to the adverse effects of climate change will be imperative for protecting and improving the livelihoods of the poor and ensuring food security (FAO, 2012a). In practical terms, climate change adaptation requires more than simply maintaining the current levels of performance of the agricultural sector; it requires developing a set of robust and yet flex- ible responses that will improve the sector’s performance even under the changing conditions brought about by climate change engenders.

Measures must be devised for reducing the negative impacts of agriculture on the ecosystem. Agriculture ac- counts for 13.5 percent of GHG emissions, or about 1.8 gigatonnes of carbon equivalent per year (Gt C eqv./year) (6.6 Gt carbon dioxide [CO2] eqv./year), mainly in the form of methane (CH4) and, more pertinent to crop produc- tion, nitrous oxide (N2O) from fertilized soils, enteric fermentation, biomass burning, flooded rice production (paddy) and manure and fertilizer production (IPCC, 2007).