--- Page 254 ---

Module 10:
Climate-smart fisheries
and aquaculture

Overview
This module looks at the climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) concept from the perspective of the fisheries
and aquaculture sector. Organized into six sections, the module provides an overview of the contributions
made by the fisheries and aquaculture sector, the climate change impacts pathways that are affecting
the sector and the vulnerabilities currently undermining resilience in aquatic systems. The ecosystem
approach to fisheries and aquaculture (EAF/EAA) is presented as the underlying approach to developing
climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture. Actions that support this approach are: sustainably increasing
output productivity and efficiency within the sector; reducing the sector’s vulnerability and increasing its
resilience to change; and reducing and removing greenhouse gases (GHG) from within the sector. The
module presents options for supporting these actions at different levels (national, regional, subsector,
individual enterprise and community). The module concludes with an evaluation of the sector’s progress
towards CSA and the elements that support the successful transition to CSA. Boxes are used throughout
the module to provide concrete examples of CSA actions and approaches.
Key messages
• Fisheries and aquaculture provide essential nutrition, support livelihoods and contribute to national
development. However, the sector is facing significant challenges in maintaining its crucial contri-
bution to these areas. Increasing global demand for fish and aquatic foods, ocean acidification and
climate variability and change will only add to these challenges.
• Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture will require: improving efficiency in the use of natural
resources to produce fish and aquatic foods; maintaining the resilience aquatic systems and the com-
munities that rely on them to allow the sector to continue contributing to sustainable development;
and gaining an understanding of the ways to reduce effectively the vulnerability of those most likely to
be negatively impacted by climate change.
• There is no lack of guidance for the sector. The Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and the
ecosystem approach to fisheries and aquaculture outline the principles and approaches that are
central to ensuring the sustainability of the sector. However, the application of these principles and
approaches is not keeping pace with the increasing need for their implementation.
• The general understanding of the implications of climate variability and change is improving. How-
ever, information on local-level impacts and vulnerabilities is lacking, which hampers adaptation
planning. Improved capacities for decision-making under uncertainty are required.
• Examples of win-win tactics for attaining CSA objectives that are available to the sector include: the
reduction of excess capacity and the implementation of fishing activities that are linked with improved
fisheries management and healthy stocks; increased production efficiency through better integrated
systems; improved feeding and reduced losses from disease in aquaculture; the reduction of post-
harvest and production losses; and the further development of regional trade.
• The transition to CSA in fisheries and aquaculture will need to take place at all levels (individual,