--- Farmer Field School (FFS): ---

551 Glossary Farmer Field School (FFS): The FFS approach is an innovative, participatory and interactive learning approach that emphasizes problem solving and discovery based learning. FFS aims to build farmers’ capacity to analyze their production systems, identify problems, test possible solutions, and eventually encourage the participants to adopt the practices most suitable to their farming systems.

Food losses: decrease in edible food mass available for human consumption throughout the different seg- ments of the supply chain. In addition to quantitative losses, food products can also face a deterioration of quality, leading to a loss of economic and nutritional value.

Food and nutrition security: This exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic ac- cess to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.

Food system: Involves all processes and activities related to the production, distribution and consumption of food that can feed a population and affects human nutrition and health. It operates within an infrastructure (roads, rivers, ports, energy and communication networks, etc.) and is influenced by political, social, economic and environmental aspects.

Food value chain: The full range of farms and firms and their successive coordinated value-adding activities that transform raw agricultural materials into food products that are sold to final consumers and disposed after use.

Food waste: Food losses resulting from decisions to discard food that still has value. Food waste is most often associated with the behavior of retailers, the food service sector and consumers, but food waste and losses take place all along food supply chains.

Genetic resources (for food and agriculture): This includes any material of plant, animal, microbial or other origin containing functional units of heredity that is of actual or potential value for food and agriculture. Ge- netic resources for food and agriculture includes the diversity present in agricultural, pastoral, forest and aquatic production systems or of importance to them: the variety and variability of animals, plants and micro- organisms at the genetic, species and ecosystem levels that sustain the structure, functions and processes of production systems. This diversity is often the result of the work of farmers, pastoralists, forest dwellers and fisherfolk over many hundreds of generations and reflects the diversity of both human activities and natural processes.

Global circulation model: Numerical models that represent physical processes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and land surface, and are the most advanced tools currently available for simulating the response of the global climate system to increasing greenhouse gas concentrations.

Green economy: An economy that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities.

Green growth: Economic growth that is environmentally sustainable: green in that it is efficient in use of natu- ral resources; clean, in that it minimizes pollution and environmental impacts; and resilient in accounting for natural hazards and the role of environmental management and natural capital in preventing physical disas- ters.

Greenhouse gases: Those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of infrared radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere, and clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapor (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O) methane (CH4), and ozone (O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere. Moreover, there are a number of entirely human-made greenhouse gases in the at-