--- Lanka, the National Disaster Management Coordination Committee represents 35 members from key sectors, ---

435 MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience binding and hence critical for ensuring accountability in DRR. Despite growing awareness and commitment to climate change adaptation, relatively few countries have legislation on climate change adaptation. There are opportunities for strengthening legislation on DRR to support adaptation and CSA, as well as to make use of this legislation as an enabling framework for CSA.

Between 73 and 80 national platforms for DRR exist today (UNISDR, 2013a). As national multistakeholder coordinating bodies for DRR, these platforms provide a solid foundation from which to build interinstitutional collaboration for CSA and catalyse CSA action. National DRR systems are at the core of countries’ capacity to cope with disaster risks. They typically bring together ministries, agencies, donors, NGOs, and civil society organizations around common DRR goals. Many of these national DRR platforms are multisectoral. In Sri Lanka, the National Disaster Management Coordination Committee represents 35 members from key sectors, including representatives of the Ministries of Environment, Home Affairs and Agriculture, the Department of National Planning, the Coastal Conservation Department, the Department for Irrigation and the Department of Meteorology (UNISDR, 2008).

Many of the same countries with national platforms also have Strategic National Action Plans for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR, 2013b), which guide the direction of risk reduction actions and set priorities at the country level. Some countries have DRR structures and planning frameworks specifically for the agriculture sector. Ethiopia’s Ministry of Agriculture established the Disaster Risk Management and Food Security Sector to co-ordinate activities related to disaster prevention and preparedness. Jamaica has developed an Agricul- ture Disaster Risk Management Plan, and Belize has formulated a Plan of Action for Disaster Risk Reduction in Agriculture and Fisheries Sector. Nepal has also recently developed an integrated strategy, the Priority Framework for Action on Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management in Agriculture.

In some countries, national policies and plans exist that are not specifically related to DRR but support risk reduction. Examples include: Namibia’s 1997 National Drought Policy and Strategy; Zimbabwe’s 1998 National Policy on Drought Management, which emphasizes forward planning, preparedness, prevention, mitigation response, recovery and rehabilitation (FAO, 2004); and Kenya’s 2002 National Action Plan to Combat Deserti- fication & Drought.

At the same time, considerable advances have been made in building national institutional mechanisms and policies for climate change adaptation. National adaptation policies are articulated in National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs). Progress in climate change adaptation efforts has been rapid and has led to a multitude of important initiatives. Experience, however, shows that these governance structures at national and local levels have developed separately from those for DRR. There is a need for greater coordination be- tween the institutional arrangements, policies and planning designed for climate change adaptation and those that have been set up for DRR (IISD, 2011). Figure 15.10 below illustrates the parallel mechanisms in place for climate change adaptation and DRR in countries in the Pacific region (UNISDR et al., 2012).

Supporters of CSA recognize the need for greater coherence and coordination, and that a “lack of coherence can prevent synergy capture and render the pursuit of the stated policy objectives ineffective” (FAO, 2010a).

An inclusive and coherent pathway for CSA would include partnerships with the institutional architecture of both DRR and climate change adaptation, as well as joint dialogue and collective action in the agriculture sec- tor for the benefit of farmers (see also Module 13 on policies). Given the institutional constraints and limited resources in many developing countries, this is a rational and cost-effective approach. On the ground, people at risk also need coherent policies and support.