--- CSA incentives in Colombia and Zambia ---

365 MODULE 13: Mainstreaming CSA into National Policies and Programmes capacities (see also Module 12 on local institutions and Module 17 on capacity development). Developing CSA policies and programmes demands an understanding of the structure and functioning of different levels of government. This principle cuts across sectors. Participatory approaches, which are more likely to build last- ing results than top-down approaches, need to be adapted to local circumstances.

Policies to mobilize non-state actors It is important that civil society, the private sector and financial institutions are all involved in the development of CSA (more on institutions in Module 12). Civil society organizations can play a role in the development of new, adapted technologies and in the provision of extension services. An example of civil society engagement is the Kenyan agricultural soil carbon project, which is supported by World Vision, a non-governmental agency.

Civil society organizations have played a strong role in testing and scaling up the ‘system of rice intensification’ (SRI). Paddy rice production system that poses special challenges for climate change mitigation. For example, the majority of GHG emissions in the agricultural sector in Viet Nam are linked to paddy rice production. SRI Box 13.4 CSA incentives in Colombia and Zambia In Colombia, there is a new focus on integrated landscape planning within a broader strategy for sustainable agriculture, forest intensification and reduced deforestation. One key theme is “to be a good cattle farmer it is necessary to be a good agricultural farmer.” A mix of policies and incentives has brought about sustainable increases in productivity for livestock by encouraging landscape-based mixed agrosilvopastoral systems. The objective has been to introduce trees and improved pasture in grazing lands. This provides improved fodder and shade, lowers heat stress for animals and reduces soil degradation. Results have included: increased meat and milk yields; improved water infiltration; increased bird populations; reduced methane emissions; and greater carbon capture. These approaches have helped achieve a ‘triple win’: increased productivity, enhanced resilience to climate variability, and reduced carbon emissions (Lopez, 2012).

In Zambia, support has focused on technological advice to producers. In addition, modest support has been provided to producers to help them overcome the upfront costs of moving to sustainable land management in cropping and livestock systems, such as the incorporation of trees into the agricultural system. Five basic conservation farming techniques are being used: retaining crop residues; concentrating tillage and fertilizer application in a permanent grid of planting basins or series of planting rows; completing land preparation in the dry season; weeding aggressively to reduce plant competition; and intercropping or rotating nitrogen-fixing legumes on up to 30 percent of cultivated area. Many farmers also incorporate nitrogen-fixing trees, which provide fodder and fuelwood. Findings show that these practices bring significant benefits (Scherr et al., 2011). However, there is also evidence that considerable barriers exist when it comes to the adoption and maintenance of these practices (Arslan et al., 2013). This evidence attests to the need for institutions and policy alignment to support the adoption of CSA practices.

Box 13.5 Linking productivity, adaptation and mitigation through incentive measures: the case of Karnataka, India In India, the US$ 120 million Karnataka Watershed Project addressed dryland and hill-farming practices covering an area of 0.5 million hectares and benefiting about 1.8 million people. Using participatory approaches it introduced improved technologies and farming practices, which led to the recovery of groundwater levels (up to 50-90 feet in 3 agro-ecological zones) and improved groundwater discharges (from 250 to 326 gallons per hour). As a result, average crop yield increased by 24-26 percent; and household incomes by about 53 percent. A related follow-up operation, the Mid-Himalayan watershed project supports social mobilization; soil and water conservation treatments that follow a micro-watershed approach; farm system intensification, including improved horticultural practices and animal health; forest institution capacity building; income-generating activities; and institutional strengthening.

Watershed management operations in some areas of India (e.g. the Mid-Himalayas in Umal Pradesh) are now gaining leverage with the International Development Association (IDA) and local funders through carbon finance in reforestation programmes.

Source: World Bank et al., 2013