--- Source: Pearson and Langridge, 2008 ---

512 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Figure 18.6 Methodologies, methods and characterizing dimensions of outcome and context vulnerability Conceptual frameworks Methodological approach Methods Characterising dimensions Quantitative Reductionist Qualitative Contructivist Experimental Dose-response models Integrated assessment models Indicator approaches Case studies Open-ended interviews Landscape reading Outcome Vulnerability Agent-based modelling Modelling Scenario based approaches Meta-analysis Household surveys Survey Ethnographic Contextual Vulnerability Source: Pearson and Langridge, 2008 From the perspective of resilience and adaptive capacity, the World Bank (2009a) indicates three broad op- tions for conducting assessments: full scope social assessment and/or extensive consultations (e.g. key informant surveys, focus group discussions, community surveys); rapid social assessments (e.g. checklists of key climate-related vulnerabilities, current coping strategies and limiting factors); and field-testing pro- ject management tools (e.g. CRiSTAL). Although not developed specifically for CSA, an empirical resilience model put forward by FAO (FAO, 2011; Alinovi et al., 2010; Frankenberger et al., 2012) uses structural equa- tion modelling and factor analysis to identify the variables that contribute to household resilience. Common components (and associated indicators) that are considered in the resilience model are: income and food access, access to basic services, social safety nets, assets, adaptive capacity and stability.

CSA options assessment Adaptation Assessments of CSA options for adaptation effectiveness are an extension of climate impact assessments.

Having gained an understanding of potential impacts of climate change and vulnerability, the best CSA practices for local conditions can be reviewed and identified. Ideally stakeholders are involved in validat- ing the findings of the assessment and help to define and select suitable and workable adaptation options.

Process-based crop growth models at the farm level could be used to suggest better management prac- tices to improve yields. Economic models could simulate, for example, the effect of a fertilizer subsidy on productivity, market prices and farm income. A screening analysis is a simple method in which the assessor answers yes or no questions about options. Those options with the most yeses can be given the highest priority or be further assessed using more quantitative analytical methods. In multi-criteria assessments, stakeholders identify the criteria to be used in assessing adaptations. Common metrics are defined to measure the criteria. Assessors rank each adaptation option against each criterion by giving scores. In cost-effectiveness analysis, the relative costs of different adaptation options that achieve similar outcomes are compared (UNFCCC, 2010b).