--- Examples of CSA platforms ---

341
MODULE 12: Local institutions
working mode. It is not always easy for a network to motivate its members to move beyond passive or cursory par-
ticipation. Building a sense of concrete ‘achievement’ can be done through initiatives such as periodic face-to-face
meetings between network members, explicitly moderated discussion groups, virtual briefings and workshops.
At the same time, it is not necessary for a network to be constantly active with vibrant collaboration. A data
repository, updated and accessed by members on an as-needed basis, is also valuable, as is a mostly passive
group of affiliates, who mobilize themselves when required.

Box 12.15
Examples of CSA platforms
Each of the CSA platforms listed below fosters international interaction on different aspects of climate change
activities using different means (e.g. face-to-face or virtual facilitation; discussion groups or document pools).
The Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation Knowledge Network (AMKN)
AMKN is a map-based online platform created by CCAFS that brings together climate, agriculture, and socio-
economic information and posts photos and videos of farmers living at research sites across the tropics. It is an
information service and key tool for practitioners, donors, policy makers, and researchers interested in food security
and climate change. The platform displays food security and climate data, such as crop adaptations to climate
change, drought indexes and global climate models. Zooming into a region, you can also explore multimedia features,
including dozens of video testimonials from farmers in CCAFS regions, which illustrate how farmers today are coping
with climate variability.
Source: CCAFS and CGIAR, 2013b
The Community for Climate Change Mitigation in Agriculture
Launched in 2012 by FAO, the Community for Climate Change Mitigation in Agriculture has built a network specifically
for practitioners who work on reducing greenhouse gas emissions in agriculture. It offers an online resource library
and hosts discussions on relevant issues, both in a member-only online forum and in a public social networking
group. The community has over 600 members. A three-week online learning programme on agroforestry was
delivered to over 250 participants in February 2013.
Source: FAO, 2013
WeADAPT
WeADAPT is an online ‘open space’ on climate change adaptation issues with over 1 500 members from more than
200 organizations. Members share case studies, tools and advice online in different thematic ‘hubs’. In doing so,
they help build a professional community of practice on adaptation issues and develop policy-relevant tools and
guidance for adaptation planning and decision-making. The forum provides a number of services. For example,
fellow members working in related fields are automatically introduced to each other in order to foster an exchange
of ideas, and materials relevant to members’ stated research interests are listed automatically. Collaboration with
the Climate Information Portal of the University of Cape Town makes international climate data accessible to all
members.
Source: WeADAPT, 2013
Climate and Development Knowledge Network
The Climate and Development Knowledge Network supports decision-makers in designing and delivering climate-
compatible development by combining research, advisory services and knowledge management in support of
locally owned and managed policy processes. It works nationally, regionally and globally in partnership with
decision-makers in the public, private and non-governmental sectors. Led by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, the
network is managed by an alliance of organizations that include Fundación Futuro Latinoamericano, International
NGO Training and Research Centre (INTRAC), LEAD International, the Overseas Development Institute and
SouthSouthNorth.
Source: Climate and Development Knowledge Network, 2012