--- 1.4 What’s new with CSA? ---

27 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries The introduction of better processing techniques that are more resource efficient not only reduces expenses but also often gives the opportunity to improve quality, exploit new markets and increase incomes. This in turn creates jobs in the agricultural and food sector, as well as in other rural-based sectors.

Comprehensive governance, from local to international To improve efficiency and resilience of food systems at every scale requires comprehensive governance, at every level, local, national, regional and international. It shall involve all stakeholders, farmers, agro-industry, retailers, consumers and public authorities.

At a global scale, there is an urgent necessity to better consider the interrelations between agriculture, food security and climate change. The international community needs to establish appropriate links between the international fora discussing food security issues and climate change. Fortunately, this is starting to happen.

Food security and climate change policies have to be better integrated at every level. Implementing CSA, and particularly adaptation to climate change also requires adequate means to promote collective management of natural resources, such as water or landscape.

The 47 National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA) prepared by the least developed countries provide a rich panorama of adaptation priority measures. These projects are of special interest and relevance because they have been designed and prioritized by the countries themselves. A close analysis of all the categories of projects (Meybeck et al., 2012) shows that most of these priority projects are linked to agriculture, including forestry and fisheries.

As pointed out by the High Level Panel of Experts on food security and nutrition (2012a), “addressing food se- curity and climate change requires concerted and coordinated involvement and action of many actors, farmers, private sector, and public actors national and international, civil society and NGOs. It is especially challenging as they are very different, sometimes have conflicting objectives and there is a need to work on a long-term perspective while most of them have to consider first a short term outcome. This requires the involvement of all stakeholders.” Integrating food security and climate change concerns has to be done at every level and pursued at different scales. It also needs to be done on a day-to-day basis at farm level. But it also must be carried out with a long- term perspective at the landscape level and country level to design locally specific, coherent, inclusive and cohesive policy packages. 1.4 What’s new with CSA?

Indeed, what is different about CSA? (Grainger-Jones, 2011) Climate smart agriculture is not a new agricul- tural system, nor is it a set of practices. It is a new approach, a way to guide the needed changes of agricultural systems, given the necessity to jointly address food security and climate change. This section aims at clarifying how CSA relates to some other approaches.

CSA shares with sustainable development and green economy objectives and guiding principles. It aims also for food security and contributes to preserve natural resources. As such, it has close links with the concept of sustainable intensification, which has been fully developed by FAO for crop production (FAO, 2011b) and is now being extended to other sectors and to a food chain approach.

Sustainable development and Green Economy The concept of sustainable development was given prominence by the Brundtland Commission in Our Com- mon Future - Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their