--- (National Adaptation Plans) and Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) and REDD+ are all relevant for ---

57 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems provide financial benefits to producers for their contribution to environmental stewardship. These can come in the form of payments for conservation efforts, tree planting or improved agricultural management. These incentives have the added advantage of increasing the financial attractiveness of alternative practices. Several examples of these incentive mechanisms already exist in developing countries, such as the Pro-poor Rewards for Environmen- tal Services in Africa Programme and the Rewards for, Use of and Shared Investment in Pro-poor Environmental Services in Asia. In addition, eco-certification systems for major agricultural commodities, such as coffee and co- coa, provide economic incentives for investments in agricultural initiatives that protect environmental services.

For climate finance in rural landscapes to be effective, the interventions need to be coordinated with local rural development activities. For example, REDD funds can be utilized to support CSA and the needed insti- tutional development.

There are several opportunities for securing private and public climate finance, such as domestic and foreign di- rect investments, and bilateral and multilateral climate change funds and programmes, including carbon markets (see Module 14). Policy makers are now faced with the challenge of developing institutional and funding environ- ments that support integrated landscape climate projects. In light of harmonizing sectoral approaches, climate finance should be linked to agricultural development finance. Nationally Adaptation programmes (NAPAs), NAPS (National Adaptation Plans) and Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) and REDD+ are all relevant for landscape interventions, as they provide the flexibility to fund policy development in support of climate change ad- aptation and mitigation on a large scale. Another option is to use REDD+ funds for creative agricultural investment strategies. The redesign of the clean development mechanism (CDM) and other carbon markets mechanisms could also expand the scope of REDD projects to include integrated landscape carbon projects.

Measuring and monitoring landscapes for multiple objectives It is necessary to measure and monitor the multiple benefits of interventions designed to establish climate-smart landscapes. Monitoring objectives must be locally defined, and cover livelihoods, biodiversity and ecosystem ser- vices. The principles and processes of monitoring should be agreed upon at the beginning of a consultative, par- ticipatory process when embarking on a landscape plan addressing multiple objectives. Right from the outset, all stakeholders should have a common understanding about the objectives to be met. The monitoring process also needs to be user-friedly.

Monitoring becomes especially important if the multiple objectives within the landscape and close relationships among different users leads to conflict. For example, agriculture is an important driver of deforestation and needs to be treated in REDD+ policies to address the multiple objectives of the land users. No single strategy can both protect forest cover over the long-term and support agricultural development. Plans dealing with these closely related issues must be made on a case-by-case basis and require site-specific analysis to predict the impact of forest and agricultural interventions.

A landscape approach for measuring and monitoring biodiversity, climate change mitigation, ecosystem health and local livelihoods, which focuses on large, ecologically and agriculturally diverse areas, can help to ensure that impacts are truly being felt on the ground and that the tradeoffs being made are acceptable to all stakeholders. The results of this monitoring, particularly on the status of compensation, the distribution of benefits, and the impacts on rights and conflict resolution, will need to be transparent and easily accessible to all stakeholders (Shames et al., 2011).

For more details on monitoring CSA in landscapes, see Module18. 2.3. Examples of landscape approaches Different landscapes will require different approaches, depending on the state and nature of the resources, land use dynamics, and social and economic contexts. The following case studies illustrate some aspects of a holistic landscape approach in different contexts.