--- Source: FAO, 2009a ---

200
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Box 7.4
Managing ecosystem services: the case of pollination
Over 75 percent of  the leading global food crops are dependent on pollination services provided by animals.
Pollinators, especially bees, affect 35 percent of the world’s crop production. The global economic value of pollination
services is estimated to be US$ 214 billion per year (Gallai et al., 2009). However, pollinators can be sensitive to rising
temperatures, and crop growth may equally be affected by high temperatures and drought. These changes can
potentially cause dysfunctions in plant-pollinator interactions (Kjøhl et al., 2011).
Figure 7.1
Predicted impact of warming on thermal performance of insects in 2100
On the basis of patterns
in warming tolerance,
climate change is
predicted to be most
deleterious for insects
in tropical zones
Source: Deutsch et al., 2008
In the tropics, most pollinators already live close to their optimal range of temperature tolerance. Increases in
temperature, therefore, could have greater negative impacts in tropics, and thus the developing world.
Although more targeted data sampling is needed to better understand the impacts of climate change on pollinators,
pollination-friendly management practices contribute building resilience in ecosystems (at the landscape level).
In multiple agro-ecosystems and ecologies, pollinator-friendly management practices have been identified that
serve to enhance yields, quality, diversity and resilience of crops and cropping systems. Examples include:
• preserving wild habitat;
• managing cropping systems, flower-rich field margins, buffer zones and permanent hedgerows to ensure
habitat and forage;
• cultivating shade trees;
• managing for bee nest sites through such means as leaving standing dead trees and fallen branches undisturbed;
• reducing application of pesticides and associated risks; and
• establishing landscape configurations that favour pollination services.

Pollination management practices can also be undertaken to explicitly build safeguards in response to climate
change. Examples of how farming communities may best adapt to climate change impacts on pollinators include
giving consideration to the seasonal availability of resources needed by pollinators and ensuring connectivity of
natural habitats in farming areas (allowing easier pollinator dispersal for range shifts in response to changing
climates).
Source: FAO, 2009a