--- Page 496 ---

483 MODULE 17: Capacity development for climate-smart agriculture Box 17.6 illustrates the role of local innovation in adapting pastoral systems to climate change in Ethiopia and Niger.

Global attention to agriculture as one of the most climate-vulnerable sectors provides an opportunity to ac- celerate a much-needed reform of extension and advisory services. Extension has long played an intermedi- ary role between farmers and technology suppliers (see Module 12 on institutions). However, the challenge of climate change requires collaboration with more actors and more complex interventions than ever before. This calls for a shift in extension systems (Wageningen University et al., 2010): • From a focus on introducing new technologies to a focus on institutional change; • From rural engagement to national-level engagement and from public service delivery to multiple agency advisory provision; • From practice development to more strategic policy development; and • From communication for information diffusion to communication for network-based development and in- novation and from core service delivery by experts to facilitation.

Effective adaptation involves the use of coherent technical and institutional solutions congruent with contem- porary thinking on innovation studies. Today, innovation is no longer associated only with technological ad- vances, but is understood as a successful combination of ‘hardware’ (i.e. new technical devices and practices), ‘software’ (i.e. new knowledge and modes of thinking) and ‘orgware’ (i.e. new social institutions and forms of organization). Climate change adaptation can also be regarded as a process of innovation (Smits, 2002; Leeu- wis, 2004).

Box 17.6 Emerging responses to climate change in pastoral systems in Ethiopia and Niger Methodology In 2008, an exploratory study was made into the emerging responses of pastoralists in Ethiopia and Niger in the face of climate change. It examined both technical and institutional innovations developed by pastoralists in families and communities to adapt to new conditions.

Outcomes The study indicated that pastoralist vulnerability to climate change varies within and between areas and communities.

Furthermore, some of their innovations are locally specific and cannot necessarily be scaled up to apply to other areas or communities. However, they do offer starting points for joint action between pastoralists and other stakeholders (e.g. researchers, development agents and government authorities) to deal with changing conditions. Moreover, the study confirmed that pastoralists’ increasing vulnerability to climate change can largely be attributed to their marginalisation in decision making about the use of resources.

In Ethiopia and Niger, a wide range of different types of innovation to address food security, sustainable resource management and improved governance within social-political units were identified. Many of these innovations rely on maintaining mobility, an important basis for pastoralist resilience. Local innovations are characterised by flexibility, multi-functionality and a high degree of integration into socio-cultural systems.

It was concluded that local innovation in adaptation to climate change needs to be assessed alongside other environmental, socio-economic and policy measures. Moreover, the focus should not be primarily on specific innovations, but rather on recognising local innovation as a process, and stimulating this process to continue interacting with other stakeholders. Rather than waiting for climate change to happen and then react, proactive ideas for already feasible innovations should be tested, in practice as well as in pastoral policy frameworks. Thus, local adaptation capacities can be strengthened through joint experimentation and other forms of investigative action led by the affected pastoralists themselves.

Source: GebreMichael et al., 2011