--- Participatory and Negotiated Territorial Development (PNTD) and a rights-based approach. ---

337 MODULE 12: Local institutions When establishing or considering support to existing CSA initiatives, it is crucial to prepare key partners to play their different roles effectively. This is especially true as some of the skills required (e.g. facilitation, synthesis, stakeholder engagement, monitoring and evaluation, impact assessment) cannot be easily mastered in formal training alone. These skills require substantial coaching and mentoring on the job. Two vital questions for CSA project designers to answer are: 1) Who is best placed to play the role of broker? 2) Who should be responsible for individual aspects of the project?

Various tools and approaches have been developed to help with this. One such tool is ‘Outcome mapping’, which was developed at the Canadian International Development Research Centre to help principal project partners articulate what they want the project to achieve. Each partner chooses specific metrics to measure progress towards achieving those outcomes. Articulating the outcomes sought by the different individuals and organizations at the project outset helps bring the different actors towards a joint understanding of overall project goals and come up with innovative strategies to achieve them (Kristjanson et al., 2009).

Many CSA initiatives, such as payments for environmental services, have to deal with conflicting viewpoints of different stakeholders (e.g. upstream versus downstream communities), which require pioneering modes of engagement. Negotiation support tools can be helpful to project and programme planners (Clark et al., 2011), as are approaches that build and nurture public-private partnerships (e.g. Box 12.12).

Box 12.11 Participatory and negotiated territorial development in Mozambique Mozambique has made significant advances in the last 20 years with legislation that can avoid a major social conflict over land and promote an equitable form of new investment. FAO facilitated the consensus-building process that led to the National Land Policy declaration (1995) and resulting Land Law (1997) using two complementary approaches:

Participatory and Negotiated Territorial Development (PNTD) and a rights-based approach.

Local communities are not always able to use all the land resources which they legally have rights over. As growing environmental concerns such as climate change increase pressures on land and other natural resources, the need for sustainable economic growth and securing local rights is underlined, especially as surging investment in large- scale agriculture occupies the best and ever-larger areas. It is not enough to rely on legal protection alone: however, existing rights must be identified and made visible through registration, but, perhaps even more importantly, rights holders must be empowered to articulate and defend their rights, allowing for equitable participation in consultations. FAO has therefore provided civic education and legal support for communities, specialized training for district officers responsible for implementation on the ground, specific programmes for paralegal training over the years, as well as extensive media campaigns and the active pursuit of partnerships.

Brokering such partnerships between smallholders, local communities, private sector actors and the overall government institutions requires time, energy and tact. FAO (as an impartial entity with expertise on the subject) assumed this brokering role in Mozambique making use of PNTD: a people-centered and process-oriented approach whose purpose is to bring diverse stakeholder interests to a negotiation table in order to build a wide consensus on further steps, clearly defining specific stakeholder contributions against a timeline.

Source: Tanner, De Wit and Norfolk, 2009