--- efforts in Benin, the Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Malawi and Uganda (UN CC: Learn, 2012). Such a strategy ---

479
MODULE 17: Capacity development for climate-smart agriculture
efforts in Benin, the Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Malawi and Uganda (UN CC: Learn, 2012). Such a strategy
allows countries to
• Take stock of relevant capacity development and learning initiatives;
• Assess existing human capacities to achieve climate change objectives;
• Identify and prioritize learning interventions in the short, medium and long term; and
• Engage educational and vocational training institutions.
Two concrete learning interventions (farmer field schools [FFS] and e-learning) for boosting technical
and functional capacities for CSA are illustrated in Box 17.2.
Box 17.2
Climate change learning approaches in the Philippines
Context
The MDG-F 1656 climate change project, implemented from 2009 to 2012 by the Philippine government and various
UN agencies, aimed to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Philippines to adapt to climate change. The project
component 3.1, led by the Department of Agriculture and FAO used FFS as an outreach vehicle to spread the pilot
projects’ demonstration activities alongside other methods such as e-learning, mentoring and hands-on technical
trainings.
Methodologies
FFS have a very long tradition in the Philippines as a means of capturing local knowledge and working with farmers
to adapt innovative management practices to local conditions based on a sound understanding of the relevant agro-
ecosystem. FFS have proved to be successful in providing effective linkages with farming communities, allowing
participatory testing and experiential learning while empowering farmers. Having started as FFS for Integrated
Pest Management focusing on farmer fields, in the last decade the FFS’ scope expanded first into Integrated Crop
Management FFS and since then also into FFS that look more broadly from farmer fields to agricultural landscapes
as a whole. Thus, Sustainable Land Management (SLM) and watershed scale FFS, pastoralist FFS and climate field
schools now also exist.
E-Learning also provides a powerful method for CSA capacity development. It can take various forms, from individual
self-study to facilitated online courses, or blend approaches by combining ‘face-to-face’ workshops and e-learning.
The MDG-F project in the Philippines introduced an e-learning tool on planning community-based adaptation to
climate change. The tool was developed by FAO and targeted to rural agricultural extension workers. It should be
noted that bringing e-learning to rural communities might be challenging if it is not carefully integrated with other
learning processes. In the Philippines project, e-learning was introduced after social mobilization and good practice
identification had already begun and was followed by field demonstrations that were clearly communicated and easy
to understand. In this way, everyone was able to clearly relate e-learning to their own situation and experience and
could easily define how to put what they had learnt into practice.
Outcomes
The advantages of combining e-learning with ‘face-to-face’ interaction (as compared with using either technique in
isolation) were as follows:
1.‘Face-to-face’ allows for better tailoring and ad-hoc adjustment of training content to specific contexts (prior
knowledge of participants and country context; ability to give direct responses to individual participants’ questions;
embeddedness in the current status of related project activities);
2.E-learning allows participants to refer back to sessions of particular interest after the course, and course CD-
ROMs can be copied and disseminated to others;
3. Particularly younger extension workers are eager to use e-learning and to improve their skills with new technology;
4.The introduction of new e-technology using ‘face-to-face’ methods also takes older, often computer illiterate
extension workers who would otherwise have been excluded, into account and brings them on board.

For these reasons, the combination of both methods for capacity development has been a key success factor of the
MDG-F1656 climate change project.
Full Report available at FAO and Republic of the Philippines, 2011