--- Page 284 ---

271 MODULE 10: Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture • Fisheries and aquaculture are embedded within complex ecosystems, for which it will be very difficult to predict responses to climate change. Adaptive and low-cost monitoring systems to help define potential consequences and test responses will be necessary. These systems will need to be interactive and capable of building a strong and well shared knowledge base across user groups. • Markets and trade may help buffer changes in production that have an impact on food security, consumer prices and supply-demand gaps. However, implications of climate change impacts and climate change policies through the supply and value chain need to be better understood. Appropriate policy measures need to be defined and implemented. • Public and private sector investment and collaboration will be needed to meet future demands and ensure the sector meets CSA objectives and delivers longer-term benefits. Including multiple stakeholders in CSA planning will foster creative options for action and help to minimize unintended consequences of chosen options. • Many of the components of CSA can be strategically matched with broader development objectives, such as sustainability, social equity and biodiversity. These different goals need to be effectively integrated. • Improved basic fisheries and aquaculture management, including the reduction of overcapacity and over- fishing, are key to building the resilience of fisheries and aquaculture socio-ecological systems as well as supporting the sector’s GHG mitigation efforts. 10.7 Conclusions The issues and practical approaches outlined in this module provide the framework within which the fisher- ies and aquaculture sector can define and apply climate-smart processes and actions. This will reduce the impacts of climate change, improve the sector’s mitigation potential and increase the resilience of producers, supply chains and communities. It should be noted that optimizing all variables of CSA at the same time is not likely to be a realistic option and may not even be necessary. Prioritizing actions will depend on the context and objectives for the fisheries and aquaculture sector in a given area and on the production system as a whole.

Developing rapid and effective responses to climate change in the fisheries and aquaculture sector, and main- streaming climate-responsive approaches within wider development goals represents a significant strategic and operational challenge. Conventional approaches for building and validating evidence within traditional disciplines and contexts may not always be feasible. Experience will need to be built up through an adap- tive management process based on action learning with broad participation and information sharing among stakeholders. In addition, the nature of climate change vulnerability will need to be further explored. Practical means need to be developed to ensure that the most vulnerable states, production systems, communities and people have the potential to develop and apply sound CSA approaches.