--- Page 159 ---

146 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK It is important to point out that these facts and figures relate to the entire agrifood chain, from ‘farm’ to ‘fork’.

They do not account for emissions related to land-use change, international trade (transport) or food waste despite the fact that GHG figures related to agriculture usually concern only behind-the-farm-gate activities (excluding fuel combustion and sewage waste) and often include land-use change impacts.4 In the following three sub-sections, we explore the potential for energy-smart agrifood systems to also be climate-smart and examine how it can fit with each dimension of CSA.

CSA objective: sustainable increases in productivity and income Energy-smart strategies that cover the diverse range of food management options are complex and can in- volve making trade-offs. In this regard, some key points relating to primary production management practices should be emphasized. • Methods used to save on inputs that are fossil fuel-dependent but also lower productivity, such as cutting back rather than optimizing the amount of fertilizer applied, are rarely beneficial and should be avoided. • High-external input production systems do not necessarily have high energy intensities (megajoules per kilogram (MJ/kg) of product), especially when they lead to increased yields. Conversely, low-input systems can have relatively high-energy intensities when they produce lower yields. • In promoting energy-smart food, balance needs to be maintained between improving access to energy sources and increasing the efficiency of available energy, as well as increasing the proportion of renewable energy. This balance must be based on local conditions and the economic trade-offs between the different options. Box 5.1 illustrates these trade-offs made in the deployment of machinery systems for small farms in Bangladesh. 4 Often LULUCF (land use, land use change and forestry) assumed emissions due to agricultural expansion are lumped together with agriculture sector emissions. In national GHG inventories prepared for reporting under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), important pre-farm gate sources of emissions such as fertilizer production (industrial processes and energy sectors), on-farm fuel combustion (energy sector) or sewage waste (waste sector) are not included. But if the whole agrifood chain is considered, other sources of emissions must be added, such as those mentioned above and also post-harvest stages of the agrifood chain, in particular agro-industrial operations, food distribution, storage and preparation and the food waste component of landfill.