--- Subsoiling  or Ripping: ---

556 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Smallholder: The definition of smallholders differs between countries and between agro-ecological zones. In favourable areas of smallholder subsistence agriculture with high population densities, smallholders often cultivate less than one hectare of land, whereas they may cultivate ten hectares or more in semi-arid areas, or manage up to ten head of livestock.

Social protection: initiatives that: (1) provide income (cash) or consumption (food) transfers to the poor; (2) protect the vulnerable against livelihood risks; and (3) enhance the social status and rights of the excluded and marginalised”.

Soil health: The capacity of soil to function as a living system.

Soil organic matter (SOM): Soil organic matter is any material produced originally by living organisms (plant or animal) that is returned to the soil and goes through the decomposition process. At any given time, it consists of a range of materials from the intact original tissues of plants and animals to the substantially decomposed mixture of materials known as humus.

Soil structure: Soil structure is defined by the way individual particles of sand, silt, and clay are assembled.

Single particles when assembled are called aggregates. Aggregation of soil particles can occur in different patterns, resulting in different soil structures.

Soil texture: Texture indicates the relative content of particles of various sizes, such as sand, silt and clay in the soil.

Subsoiling or Ripping: Soil preparation treatment done with tined implements to break up hardpans without turning the soil upside down.

Supplementary irrigation: The process of providing additional water to stabilise or increase yields under site conditions where a crop can normally be grown under direct rainfall, the additional water being insufficient to produce a crop. The concept consists in making up rainfall deficits during critical stages of the crops in order to increase yields.

Supply chain: The full range of activities, which are required to bring a product or service from conception, through the different phases of production (involving a combination of physical transformation and the input of various producer services), delivery to final customers, and final disposal after use.

Sustainability (Economic): A situation whereby: (1) the value added resulting from upgrading in the value chain (additional profits, wages, taxes, consumer value) is positive for each stakeholder in the extended value chain whose behavior (in terms of upgrading) is expected to change in order to create the additional value; and (2) the generation of added value sets in motion, or speeds up, a process of growth and structural transformation.

Sustainability (Environmental): Meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs.

Sustainable and inclusive value chain development: The full range of farms and firms and their successive co- ordinated value-adding activities that transform raw agricultural materials into food products that are sold to final consumers and disposed after use, in a manner that is profitable throughout the chain, has broad-based benefits for society and does not permanently deplete natural resources.

Sustainable use of genetic resources: The use of components of biological diversity in a way and at a rate that does not lead to the long-term decline of biological diversity, thereby maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of present and future generations.