--- Sources: IFPRI, 2012; CCAFS and CGIAR, 2012b ---

339
MODULE 12: Local institutions

Cultural considerations
While addressing questions of equity and representation, CSA projects need to take into account the cultural
institutions that shape the lives and practices of the communities they seek to support. Negotiating a balance
between the international principle of equity and the reality lived in local communities can be a delicate mat-
ter. In this regard, the issue of women’s rights may be particularly sensitive. In addition, committees elected
democratically for project support may ignore existing informal institutions and traditional leadership (Reid
et al., 2010). Because they may be seen as central to the local cultural identity, certain traditional agricultural
practices may not be able to be replaced with climate-smart practices (Box 12.14). Taking local realities into
account is vital if projects are to be successful over the long term.
A participatory planning process allowing stakeholders to articulate their convictions, preferences and con-
cerns is of critical importance. This ensures that these issues can be taken into account in project design from
the outset (see Box 12.14). Cultural considerations overlap with questions of equity. Again, participatory plan-
ning should include skilled mediators and capacity building to integrate cultural institutions into CSA project
plans.
Box 12.13
Women in (climate-smart) agriculture
The ‘Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index’ (WEAI), an approach for measuring the empowerment, agency,
and inclusion of women in the agriculture sector, was launched by the International Food Policy Research Institute
(IFPRI) and partners in 2012.
The Index measures women’s empowerment relative to men within their households. The five domains of
empowerment for women considered in the Index are:
• inclusion in decisions about agricultural production;
• access to and decision-making power over productive resources;
• control over use of income;
• leadership in the community; and
• use of time.

In 2011, pilot surveys, conducted in Bangladesh, Guatemala and Uganda, provided insights into the different gender
dynamics in each country. The WEAI partners continue to validate the Index, testing whether the relationships
between empowerment and its underlying determinants remain consistent in larger samples. These efforts will help
to promote transparency and ensure that investments in women’s empowerment are targeted for maximum impact.
Also seeking to further gender equity, CCAFS and FAO published a training guide for agricultural development
professionals in 2012. The guide provides users with resources and participatory action research tools for collecting,
analysing and sharing gender-sensitive information about agricultural communities, households and individuals
who are facing a changing climate.
Sources: IFPRI, 2012; CCAFS and CGIAR, 2012b