--- Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA) ---

21 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries Therefore, building resilience goes hand in hand with the need to anticipate within uncertainty, within the sys- tem, or across scales. In that sense, specific risk monitoring not only reduces vulnerability but also increases resilience as it allows for the anticipation of risks and their changes.

A good example of actions to build resilience in the face of uncertainties due to climate change can be found in the domain of genetic resources (HLPE, 2012), which is being considered by the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA)6 . If climate changes, farmers might need to rely on different genetic resources, some that are already used elsewhere, or other species or varieties that are now consid- ered minor but that may be better adapted to new conditions. To do so, access to the largest possible pool of genetic resources is needed. Genetic resources, which are also threatened by climate change, are crucial for adaptation (see Module 6 on genetic resources). We need to preserve diverse genetic material, including tradi- tional and improved crop varieties and their wild relatives. They are adapted to specific conditions, have been selected for different uses, and constitute the reservoir from which varieties can be developed to cope with effects of climate change, such as drought, the shortening of the growing season, increased incidence of pests and diseases. Preserving genetic resources increases the resilience potential of the whole system. To achieve this, the potential effective genetic resources have to be accessible to farmers where they are needed. It is not enough to have the appropriate genetic resources in a gene bank or a research centre. They have to be multi- plied and distributed, which requires plant breeders, seed enterprises and the proper legal system to certify the quality of the seeds and the accuracy of the genetic information. All these actors and elements constitute ‘seed systems’, which enable farmers to have the seeds they need. Regional harmonization of seed rules and regulations is also essential, particularly as crops will move to adapt to climate change (Burke et al., 2009).

In agroforestry systems the various dimensions and scales interconnect to increase the resilience of farming systems. 6 The Secretariat of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture has commissioned and prepared several back- ground papers (No 48, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 60) on climate change and genetic resources available at http://www.fao.org/nr/cgrfa/cgrfa- back/en/?no_cache=1.

Box 1.6 A change of system: from slash and burn to agroforestry in Central America Since 2000, FAO has initiated special programmes for food security with the governments of Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador, among others. To improve and develop agroforestry systems in the sub-region, these programmes worked together, sharing practices, experiences and results. Agroforestry systems are promoted as a substitute to traditional slash-and-burn systems, particularly on slopes. They are at the same time more efficient and resilient.

In traditional slash-and-burn systems, a family needs close to 6 hectares to maintain itself on a diet of corn and beans. The family exploits a plot for two years and then sets it aside for 14 years. In agroforestry systems a plot is exploited for 10 years, producing, along with corn and beans a variety of other products, often including livestock.

The plot is then set aside for only 5 years. A family thus needs 1.4 hectares to sustain itself and enjoy a more diverse and balanced diet. Land is therefore almost 4 times more efficient. Efficiency also increases because in agroforestry systems, yields (which are comparable the first year) do not decline over time as they do very rapidly in slash-and-burn systems. In fact, yields can even increase slightly over time in agroforestry systems. Productivity of labour and of capital is also higher in agroforestry systems. Costs are reduced, especially for fertilizers, because of more organic matter in the soil and better use of nutrients by the plants. At the community level, diversification of production triggers the development of local markets. Consequently, in terms of resource use, agroforestry systems are efficient at safeguarding food security and the environment.

Agroforestry systems are also much more resilient: • Yields are less variable, because of better humidity retention. • They provide for more diverse production, which ensures in turn a buffer against both the variability of crop yields and price volatility. • They offer diversified sources of income, including through selling wood for various uses (and at various time scales), which can also provide a buffer against some economic shocks. • They protect the soil from erosion, which is a major concern in these areas. Studies have shown that in agroforestry systems erosion is reduced by a factor of more than 10.

Source: FAO, 2010d