--- BioCarbon Fund: the Agricultural Carbon Project in Kenya ---

402 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Most prominently, the Verified Carbon Standard recently approved a carbon accounting methodology for sus- tainable agricultural land management developed in the context of the controversially discussed Agricultural Carbon Project in Kenya. The project, implemented by the Swedish non-governmental organization Vi-Agro- forestry, produces carbon credits from CSA activities that will be bought by the World Bank’s BioCarbon Fund.

The BioCarbon Fund is set up as a public-private trust fund and is part of a larger set of different carbon funds managed and administered by the World Bank’s Carbon Finance Unit.13 The BioCarbon Fund specifi- cally provides carbon finance for projects that create GHG reduction in forest, agro and other ecosystems.

Active exploration of opportunities to create carbon credits from carbon sinks makes the BioCarbon Fund an unusual player in the climate finance universe. The Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement signed between the BioCarbon Fund and Vi-Agroforestry in 2010, was the first for soil carbon credits, garnering significant in- ternational attention. Through the Verified Carbon Standard approval, these carbon credits will be tradable on the voluntary carbon market. The BioCarbon Fund thereby advances the inclusion of CSA activities in carbon trading schemes. At the same time, opponents of agricultural carbon credits have criticized the Agricultural Carbon Project in Kenya as affirming some of the concerns listed above, especially the lack of accurate meas- urability of soil carbon sequestration (see Box 14.3).

Private sector and philanthropy In the context of this section, private sector CSA investments do not mean the “transformed” agricultural in- vestments by agribusiness or smallholders that follow CSA principles, but international private sector funding that contributes to catalysing this transition. Looking at the entire landscape of climate finance, the private sector is in fact the single largest source of financing (Buchner, 2011). However, private sector funding in the 13 Funds managed by the World Bank’s Carbon Finance Unit also include the Community Development Carbon Fund.

Box 14.3 BioCarbon Fund: the Agricultural Carbon Project in Kenya The Kenya Agricultural Carbon Project has received much international attention and praise as a ground-breaking pilot initiative with the goal to illustrate the potential and feasibility of agricultural soil carbon sequestration in the context of carbon markets: “The Kenya Agricultural Carbon Project is breaking new ground in designing and implementing climate finance projects in the agricultural sector. The project is regarded as an innovative example for climate-smart agriculture within and outside the World Bank. For the first time, while increasing productivity and enhancing resilience to climate change, smallholder farmers in Africa will receive payments for greenhouse gas mitigation based on sustainable agricultural land management. Quantification of carbon sequestration is monitored based on a newly developed carbon accounting methodology.” (Woelcke, 2012) “The Kenya Agricultural Carbon Project is not only the first project that sells soil carbon credits in Africa, it is also paving the way for a new approach to carbon accounting methodologies. As Kenya ramps up its participation in carbon markets, this project illustrates concretely how carbon finance can both support the environment and generate revenues for local communities.” (Chassard, 2010) At the same time, the project has drawn criticism pointing to the displayed high transaction costs and questions about the adequacy of the employed MRV methodology, which will not include actual soil sampling. This criticism is mostly embedded in a more general rejection of carbon markets as a suitable tool for agricultural mitigation, highlighting the large potential for leakage and impermanence, the unstable situation of carbon markets overall, and concerns about shifting the burden of emissions reductions to developing countries. “Nearly half of the monetary benefits from the proposed offset credits would be absorbed by project developers as ‘transaction costs,’ with miniscule returns to the farmers who would be implementing the project. While carbon markets are promoted as a way to ‘leverage’ climate funding, to judge by this project, the rules being developed risk oversimplifying evolving science on climate mitigation and diverting resources from the urgent task of adaptation. [...] Given the high degree of uncertainty about this model project’s mitigation benefits and high transaction costs to achieve mostly co-benefits, could such co-benefits be more efficiently achieved through direct access to finance for agricultural adaptation?” (Sharma, 2011)