--- Nation’s Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio considered the green economy ---

357 MODULE 13: Mainstreaming CSA into National Policies and Programmes 13.1 Climate-smart agriculture within larger economic and policy frameworks Agriculture is an essential driver of economic growth, particularly in rural areas and least developed countries.

At the national level, boosting agricultural production stimulates overall economic growth and development, particularly in countries with high economic dependence on agriculture (FAO, 2012a). At the same time, agri- culture is a major user of natural capital and has a considerable impact on the environment. The 2012 United Nation’s Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio considered the green economy1 as one of the essential tools for achieving sustainable development. It called for economically viable sustainable agriculture (crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture) to eradicate hunger. At the same time, the move to more sus- tainable agriculture must also help conserve land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, biodiversity and ecosystems, and enhance resilience to climate change and natural disasters (UN, 2012).

CSA meets these expectations by improving productivity, enhancing resilience and reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. CSA and green economy are thus complementary concepts, and greening the economy with CSA is a concrete way to operationalize sustainable development (FAO, 2012a).

CSA policies must facilitate “using natural capital without using it up”. Agriculture is crucial to climate-smart development and overall green growth because of the key contribution it makes to food security and human welfare and because of its role as a principle ‘user’ of natural capital. Agriculture accounts for 70 percent of water extracted; covers 40 percent of land area; and, together with land use change, forest degradation and deforestation, produces 30 percent of global GHG emissions. CSA is about meeting the needs of people for food, fuel, timber and fibre. It also contributes to economic development and poverty reduction; maintains and enhances the resilience of the natural ecosystem functions on which green economic growth depends; and addresses the new challenge of climate change. CSA is resource-efficient, resilient, and low-carbon emitting.

Identification of supporting policies and programs The key to developing appropriate policies, strategies and actions to enhance CSA adoption is to understand the barriers to adoption of CSA practices, including the trade-offs between short-term costs and longer-term benefits, the mix of private and public benefits, institutional and financial barriers and lack of access to inputs or markets (FAO,2012b). The main requirements for an policy environment capable of promoting CSA are greater coherence, coordination and integration between climate change, agricultural development and food security policy processes (FAO, 2010).

CSA needs to be mainstreamed into core government programmes with appropriate priority given to public support of CSA. This process should be developed consistently with ongoing national climate-resilient long- term visions, such as the National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs), National Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) National Commu- nications. It should include vulnerable economic sectors and ecosystems.

A gender-sensitive approach is also crucial to achieving CSA. The roles, responsibilities and capabilities of men and women need to be well understood to ensure that both men and women have access to and benefit from CSA practices and policies. 1 Agencies have similar definitions for green economy and inclusive green growth. UNEP defines a green economy as “one that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities” (UNEP, 2011). OECD (2011) defines green growth as “fostering economic growth and development, while ensuring that natural assets continue to provide the resources and environmental services on which our well-being relies.” The World Bank (2012) defines green growth as economic growth that is environmentally sustainable: green in that it is efficient in use of natural resources; clean, in that it minimizes pollution and environmental impacts; and resilient in accounting for natural hazards and the role of environmental management and natural capital in preventing physical disasters. For FAO the green economy embraces a vision that tries to steer economic develop- ment in the direction of sustainability, of which there are five key pillars: renewable energy and energy efficiency, waste management and minimization, sustainable use of natural resources, and green job creation.