--- Source: World Bank, 2008a ---

366 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK is an approach to rice cultivation that increases rice yields significantly and at the same time reduces require- ments for seeds, water and chemical inputs. The system originated in Madagascar, and has been successfully tested in 30 countries in West Africa, Latin America and Asia often with the support of civil society organiza- tions.

Improving the broad enabling environment for responsible investment has a key role to play in CSA. Many private sector companies are committed to reducing the environmental footprint of their operations. They are also the principal players in building value chains and connecting farmers with markets. Box 13.7 provides an example of a technical innovation by an Indian private-sector organization in India that has developed a produc- tion system adapted to local conditions.

Monitoring and assessment framework As assessments, monitoring and evaluation are covered in Module 18, this section only provides a brief over- view on monitoring and evaluation issues from a policy perspective.

In general, monitoring and assessment for CSA should be integrated into existing measurement and assess- ment systems for agriculture and climate-responsible development. Simple results-based systems should be used. Also, the present capacity for monitoring and evaluation of the transition of existing agriculture and food systems to CSA needs strengthening in many countries (also see Module 17 on capacity development).

Measuring climate change adaptation is a highly debated topic. Using a single approach to measure adapta- tion, adaptive capacity and vulnerability presents challenges. In general, the measurement of adaptation (or vulnerability) is hampered by difficulties in defining the concept to be measured and the interaction of multiple factors, which vary depending on location, time and scale.

One way of overcoming these difficulties is to build monitoring and learning networks across food systems and across different levels of governance. The household-level decisions concerning agricultural production are often influenced by higher-level institutions and policies. A comprehensive food system monitoring and learn- ing network enhances the understanding of an intervention’s impact on the food system and on other interven- Box 13.6 Improving climate resilience through participatory pastoral development in Ethiopia Ethiopian pastoralists are one of the most vulnerable groups to climate shocks. Livestock products, including hides and skins, are a key source of livelihoods in Ethiopia, and, after coffee, the second largest source of foreign exchange earnings. Well managed rangelands and pastoral systems are climate-resilient, bring economic benefits and conserve the natural environment.

A community pastoral development programme in Ethiopia (US$ 80 million) is working to increase the resilience of Ethiopian pastoralists to external shocks and improve the livelihoods of beneficiary communities, and in doing so, contribute to overall poverty alleviation in the country. The objectives of the programme’s first component of is to enhance sustainable livelihoods and strengthen decentralized and participatory planning at the community/ kebele (sub-district) and woreda level, while operating within the regional government structure. Women and men in pastoral and agropastoral communities design and implement community action plans that reflect their development priorities. The programme’s second component addresses pastoral risk management. The goal of this component is to improve the existing pastoral early warning system through a participatory approach; establish an early response fund; and support disaster preparedness and mitigation investment planning and financing of associated subprojects. The third component involves improving community-level participatory learning and knowledge management and supporting knowledge management and information exchange at the federal and regional levels. The fourth component deals with project management and supports project management units at the regional and federal levels in their efforts to coordinate, supervise and implement project activities under the direction of the ministry of federal affairs and the pastoral commissions and bureaus of each region.

Source: World Bank, 2008a