--- Page 303 ---

290
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
The sustainable value chain framework (see Figure 11.1 above) consists of the core value chain, which includes:
• the value chain actors: these are mainly private sector actors, but can also consist of public sector organi-
zations. They are heterogeneous and vary with regard to size different ways;
• four core functions or stages: this includes production (farming), aggregation, processing and distribution
(wholesale, retail). The aggregation stage is where basically post-harvest handling and food storage takes
place; and
• governance structure: refers to the government mechanisms and linkages between the different chain
actors in the chain.

The extended value chain includes:
• business development support providers: they facilitate the value addition process and can be divided into
three groups: input, service and financial providers.
Another characteristic of the value chain is that value is determined in end markets. This means that if addi-
tional value is added to the product due to, for example, use of a green technology, the value is determined and
captured by the chain actors only when the consumer buys the product. There are different ways in which value
is added to a product, for example when a product is processed or packaged. Value can also be subtracted at
any stage in the value chain, such as when post -harvest losses occur during storage and packing.
Furthermore, value chain actors and business support providers operate in a national and global enabling en-
vironment, which contains social and natural elements. The social elements can be categorised into socio-cul-
tural (e.g. customs, beliefs, values), organizational (e.g. partnerships, cooperatives, associations), institutional
(e.g. laws, regulations, policies) and infrastructural (e.g. roads, rail lines, electrical grids, telecommunications)
issues (see Module 12 for more information on institutional context analysis).
The sustainability of the food value chain revolves around three dimensions.
1.An economic dimension, which focuses on activities that each actor or service provider provides that is
commercially viable (profitable) or services that are fiscally viable.
2.A social dimension, which refers to social and cultural aspects regarding societal acceptance of the dis-
tribution of benefits and costs associated with the increased value that has been created. For example, it
takes into account how food is consumed, the amounts of energy and water used when food is prepared or
cooked as well as whether consumers reduce, reuse or recycle their food waste.
3.An environmental dimension, which refers to the sustainable use of natural inputs and resources through-
out the chain as well as any impact on biodiversity, the amounts of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
released, and the carbon sequestration and reduction potential of GHGs in the process of value creation.
How does the sustainable and inclusive food value chain contribute to CSA?
The agricultural sector, including crop and livestock production, fisheries and forestry, must transform and be-
come climate-smart in order to successfully tackle current food security and climate change challenges. The
sustainable and inclusive food value chain approach can be applied for this transition as its three sustainability
dimensions – economic, social and environmental are directly linked to three pillars of CSA.
There are many similarities between the two approaches. Both approaches focus on increasing productiv-
ity, profitability and incomes. The sustainable and inclusive food value chain focuses, in particular, on how
increased value is captured at end markets as consumers are willing to pay for this value addition. Moreover,
it includes a distributional principle, which implies that profits and incomes should be equally distributed,
thereby aiming to increase people’s resilience to shocks and variability, which is the second pillar of CSA. The
only difference between the two approaches is that sustainable and inclusive food value chain looks at envi-
ronmental impacts in a broader sense, for example it also considers the water footprint of food products and
not merely GHG emissions.