--- Page 128 ---

115 MODULE 4: Soils and their management for CSA Assessing the status of soils Knowing the status and condition of soils and their properties is fundamental for making decisions about sustainable soil management practices that contribute to climate-smart land use. In this respect, it is crucial to carry out soil assessments and undertake the analysis and mapping of data and information through soil surveys, including in-situ visual soil assessments (FAO, 2008). These surveys should involve land users and be supported by technical experts. In addition, they need to be backed up by laboratory testing for specific properties. Various conventional and digital mapping tools should be used to extrapolate the findings across a range of soil and terrain units, vegetation types, and/or agro-ecological zones. Ideally, soil information will be made available as continuous maps that emphasise soil’s attributes. Visual soil assessments should also involve land users and be supported by technical experts to assess physical properties (texture, structure, water holding capacity, dispersion) and chemical properties (ph, nutrients, salinity). For quantitative chemical characterizations soil test kits are available in many countries or can be ordered through the internet. For ex- ample, the United Sates Department of Agriculture has developed a soil quality test kit for nine soil parameters (USDA and NRSC, 1998). However, the kit does not include any for the labile SOC fraction – the parts of soil organic carbon with most rapid turnover through oxidation by microbial activity which releases CO2 into the at- mosphere. These labile fractions of SOC are important to study in their own right as they fuel the soil food web and greatly influence nutrient cycles and biologically-related soil properties. The use of dilute, slightly alkaline potassium permanganate and calcium chloride and a colorimeter represents a simple method of estimating changes in biologically active SOC that can be conducted in the field and may provide an early indication of soil degradation or how management practices are affecting soil quality (Weil et al., 2003; FAO, 2012).

Preventing land conversion and protecting vulnerable lands to high SOM losses Intensive land uses are expanding into areas where SOC stocks are less resilient. For example, semi-arid savannas and grasslands, tropical rainforests and peat lands are all being converted to arable land at an increasing rate. Temperate humid grasslands lose about 30 percent of their SOC after 60 years of cultiva- tion (Tiessen and Stewart, 1983; Guo and Gifford, 2002). Soil carbon stocks in semi-arid environments can decrease by 30 percent in less than five years when native vegetation or pastures are converted to cropland (Zach et al., 2006; Noellemeyer et al., 2008). Pastures established on cleared Amazon rainforest emit between 8 and 12 tonnes of carbon per hectare (Fearnside and Barbosa, 1998; Cerri et al., 2007). Cultivation of tropi- cal forest soils causes losses of more than 60 percent of original SOC stocks in just a few years (Brown and Lugo, 1990).

Tropical peatlands converted to cropland or plantations are a hotspot of carbon emissions (see examples of peatland management also in Module 2 on landscape approach). Draining peat soils to introduce commercial production systems in tropical environments causes ongoing losses of up to 25 tonnes of carbon per hectare per year (Jauhiainen et al., 2011). In boreal peatlands, emissions from cropland are around 7 tonnes of carbon per hectare per year (Couwenberg, 2011). Although drylands6 have lower mitigation potential per hectare than humid lands, their overall contribution could be highly significant since dry and sub-humid lands cover 47 percent of the Earth’s land surface. Moreover, many dryland regions affected by land degradation and are sub-optimally managed could rapidly respond to improvements in management (Farage et al., 2007).

Assessments of land resources are needed to understand trends in land conversion; the type, extent and severity of various land degradation processes; and the extent and effectiveness of existing improved or sus- tainable land management measures. Such assessments will identify hotspots and bright spots in terms of land degradation (soil, water and biodiversity) and climate change. Land use planning can then be used to determine suitable land uses and provide policy support or incentives to reduce land conversion and promote the adoption of sustainable practices, with particular attention given to peatlands and drylands that are more vulnerable to climate change. 6 Drylands are areas characterized by lack of water, which constrains their two major interlinked services of primary production and nutrient cycling (FAO, 2005).