--- Page 60 ---

47 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems To achieve food security and better livelihoods in the agricultural sector, ecosystems need to remain in a productive state. They need to deliver a variety of resources and processes that are crucial for crop, livestock, forest and aquatic production systems and rural livelihoods. Productivity depends on ecosystem functioning, which builds on the processes shaped by interactions among biological communities of both wild and domes- ticated species, and biophysical processes, such as water regulation and nutrient cycling. Ecosystem function- ing ultimately ensures the delivery of ecosystem services.

Ecosystem services are generally classified according to the benefits that they deliver: provisioning services (e.g the provision of food, fiber, energy and water); regulating services (e.g. the regulation of pest and disease outbreaks, the cycling and purification of water or regulation of greenhouse gas [GHG] emissions and car- bon sequestration); supporting services (e.g. pollination and nutrient recycling); and cultural services (MEA, 2005). The provisioning services depend upon a wide variety of supporting and regulatory services, such as soil fertility and pollination (MEA, 200) that determine the underlying biophysical capacity of agro-ecosystems.

Biodiversity underpins all ecosystem services. A rich genetic base increases the likelihood that there will be species present in the system that have the traits necessary to fulfil different functional roles in the ecosystem and allow the continued delivery of ecosystem services in a changing climate (see also table 2.1 and more on genetic resources in Module 6).

Sustainable production intensification (SPI) is an important tool for increasing production in climate-smart systems. SPI saves natural resources, time and money by increasing the efficiency of farming systems. More is produced with less inputs by applying appropriate inputs at the right time and in the right amount, optimizing resource use and reducing waste. SPI uses knowledge-intensive approaches, such as conservation agricul- ture, integrated plant nutrient management, integrated pest management, water management and pollination management.

Similarily, organic agriculture is a holistic production management system that promotes and enhances agro- ecosystem health, including biodiversity, biological cycles and soil biological activity (FAO, 2009). It builds on many of the principles of SPI, but it covers the whole food system, from production to labeling and commerciali- zation according to precise standards.

The ecosystem approaches to fisheries and aquaculture (EAFA) are holistic strategies for managing capture fish- eries and aquaculture that integrate ecological, socio-economic and governance dimensions. These strategies facilitate the sustainable use of natural resources and the integration of fisheries and aquaculture with other production sectors in coastal ecosystems (also see Case Study 2.3 and Module 10 on fisheries and aquaculture).

Table 2.1 Global status of provisioning, regulating, and cultural ecosystem services Service Sub-category Status Notes Provisioning Services Food crops substantial production increase livestock substantial production increase capture fisheries declining production due to overharvest aquaculture substantial production increase wild foods declining production Fiber timber +/– forest loss in some regions, growth in others cotton, hemp, silk +/– declining production of some fibers, growth in others wood fuel declining production