--- governance—the REDD+ Participatory Governance Assessment in Indonesia ---

480 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 17.2 Strategies for improving policy coherence and effectiveness Building on Module 12 on local institutions and Module 13 on mainstreaming CSA into national policies and programmes, the following two key strategies for improving policy coherence and effectiveness will be dis- cussed: multi-stakeholder processes and efforts to link scientific assessments and decision-making in CSA.

Facilitating multi-stakeholder processes Facilitating multi-stakeholder processes is a key strategy for improving a conducive enabling environment, including governance. Good and efficient governance of natural resources and the equitable and transparent distribution of benefits lead to the success of many policies and measures aiming for climate-smart agricul- tural systems. It is important to create inclusive spaces in which multi-stakeholder dialogue about CSA can take place, such as cross-ministerial roundtables, multi-stakeholder platforms for strategy development or the coordination of regional bodies, among others.

The capacity development activities for REDD+ readiness supported by the UN-REDD Programme is one such example. They focus on stakeholder consultation and participation, as well as cross-sectoral coordination in REDD+ planning and implementation in developing countries. Box 17.3 illustrates one of the many methodolo- gies developed in this context.

Linking scientific assessments and decision making Creating an interface between science, planning and policy is essential for achieving CSA. The following Box (Box 17.4) illustrates efforts to develop simple and robust scientific tools that can guide decision making of farmers on a seasonal and long-term basis.

Box 17.3 Facilitating multi-stakeholder processes to support improved governance—the REDD+ Participatory Governance Assessment in Indonesia Methodology The participatory governance assessment (PGA) provides a clear picture of a country’s REDD governance situation, identifying gaps and needs through inclusive, participatory, multi-stakeholder processes. The methodology has been developed and tested by the United Nations Development Programme and relies on a partnership between government and civil society to define governance challenges and to develop performance improvement processes.

The assessments aim to (i) analyze and obtain credible information; and (ii) trigger public opinion, creating a demand for accountability and thereby ensuring government leadership on improving governance. The framework develops disaggregated governance indicators that feed into a tailored information management system that reinforces domestic accountability over time.

Indonesia was the first UN-REDD country to pilot the PGA methodology. Different stakeholders’ views were taken into account to develop a set of governance indicators collaboratively. The assessment looked at three areas of governance in particular: legal and policy frameworks; capacities of REDD+ actors (nationally and sub-nationally), including civil society actors and business entities; and the impact of existing laws and practices. In 2011/2012 a series of meetings were held, including national workshops and provincial consultations with representatives from governments, NGOs, academia and forest business associations. A meeting of the expert panel was also held to further refine the indicators and the methodology. It comprised of government representatives, members of civil society and of academia, as well as governance practitioners and members of the UN-REDD Programme.

Outcomes Preliminary recommendations from the PGA in Indonesia included: (i) ensure discussions on framework, structure and measurement flow early on, (ii) apply iterative methods that allow for constant tool improvement, (iii) engage external reviewers (in addition to consultations at national and provincial level) for quality assurance. The revised indicator set will serve as a basis for collecting the data necessary to assess REDD+ governance in the Indonesian context. The PGA in Indonesia focused on the following governance issues related to REDD+: spatial and forest planning, rights regulation, forest organization, forest management, forest control, and REDD+ infrastructure.

Full Reports available at UN-REDD, 2012a and 2012b