--- Japan-funded Analysis and Mapping of Impacts under Climate Change for Adaptation and Food Security project. ---

511 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation Vulnerability assessment Impacts on agricultural productivity and other aspects of the sector can lead to different repercussions in household income and food security. Vulnerability of livelihoods depends on the capacity of local communities to substitute a negatively affected production system with an alternative that could prevent losses in agricul- tural income, provide subsistence production, or supply food to urban markets. Vulnerability assessments characterize and identify areas, households or subpopulations that have particularly low livelihood resilience.

This helps CSA planners prioritize their actions and target vulnerable communities (e.g. youth, elderly, land- less people, and women). Vulnerability assessments also provide the basis for the development of strategies to increase the resilience of livelihoods to climate change.

With the potential impacts of climate change identified from previous assessments, vulnerability can be as- sessed by evaluating the adaptive capacity of the system in a top-down approach. The bottom-up approach, on the other hand, focuses more on collecting different indicators that would characterize the vulnerability of CSA and associated sectors to various risks, including climate change. There are a wide variety of possible in- dicators, including: socio-economic resources, technology, infrastructure, information and skills, institutions, biophysical conditions and equity (Desai and Hulme, 2004). Climate change and variability is considered as one of the threats to society and the environment, along with socioeconomic, political and institutional structures and changes. Contextual conditions of the society and environment clarify their adaptive capacity and vulner- ability to potential threats. Some of the common methods of vulnerability assessments are categorized in Figure 18.6.

Box 18.4 MOSAICC – an integrated modelling system for assessing the impact of climate change on agriculture The impacts of climate change on crop production are the result of a combination of factors, including: changes in temperature and rainfall regimes; variations in growing season starts and lengths; carbon dioxide (CO2) fertilization; pest and disease outbreaks; and water availability for irrigation. Changes in agricultural yields will affect food production and have repercussions throughout the national economy. A multidisciplinary approach is useful for dealing with these different aspects.

MOSAICC is an initiative by FAO that integrates multidisciplinary models to capture different aspects of the impacts of climate change on agriculture. MOSAICC includes a tool for statistical downscaling of climate projections, two crop models (Aquacrop and WABAL), one precipitation-runoff model (STREAM) and one economic model (Computable General Equilibrium). All of these tools and models are incorporated into unique software architecture. A spatial database has been structured around a data typology that has been defined to link data and models. The architecture also has utilities to process the data so that it can pass from model to model, and web interfaces that can be used to manage data and simulations.

Such an integrated system offers a number of advantages. Remote access and the system’s user-friendliness (users do not need to install any software on their own computer) facilitate collaborative work with experts around the world. Computing time is reduced and data conversion and reformatting are taken care of within the system. The system allows data tracking down the succession of experiments and can carry out replicable studies. In addition, the modularity of the system gives users the opportunity to substitute different models. Finally, the system runs at low cost. It does require maintenance, but all software programs are free of charge.

The whole system is installed on a central server for use by national experts in specialized institutions of developing countries. The different models within MOSAICC should be run by researchers with the relevant expertise. The experts are trained to use the models.

The system is being deployed in Guatemala, Morocco and Niger in the framework of the European Union/FAO Programme on global governance for hunger reduction, and in Peru and the Philippines in the framework of the Japan-funded Analysis and Mapping of Impacts under Climate Change for Adaptation and Food Security project.

Source: FAO, 2013