--- I - Possible access ---

263 MODULE 10: Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture Table 10.4 Climate change impacts and response options in specific post harvest/production systems System Significance of system Climate disturbance level – example issues (I) and responses (R) Minor* Significant** Major*** Small landing facilities Inland or coastal, various small structures, some with shelter, water, ice, fish handling areas, cool or cold storage, some with vessel/ gear repair/store; handling some 30% of global output I - Possible access disruptions, risk of physical damage, breakdown of facilities, higher costs of protection, maintenance or repair; some may become non-viable if more distant from fishing areas.

R - options to select and concentrate landings need to be investigated.

I - More significant disruptions with greater consequences; greater possibility of dislocation from fishing areas, higher costs and lower local value retention.

R - Investment in facility upgrades would require effective climate-proofing.

I - Potentially major dislocations from resource areas, greater physical risks increasing potential for non-viable operations R - may need specific investments in climate- proofed facilities and infrastructure networks.

Commercial port/handling unit Larger, more developed, higher specification facilities for landing, marketing, distribution, normally in cold chain, with defined standards; services for vessels/ gear etc; some 70% global output.

I - Risks of resource access/higher costs of supply, balanced by continued potential to add value, protect investment, maintain supply chain expectations; risks of physical damage and quality disruptions.

R - Aquaculture may gain in importance.

I - Greater risks of disruptions, non-viability, particularly from reduced throughput in multiple- sourced centres; R - possible greater aquaculture role; some relocations, or more flexible systems/ operations; costs of improving infrastructure may need to be recovered I - More extreme impacts of resource dislocation, physical risks, R - potential shifts to vessel-based handling and processing, landing to less specialized centres. New, lower-risk centres may also develop, and numbers of risks may reduce.

Fresh product supply systems Range of inter-connected storage, handling, transport elements linking first sale to markets, retail outlets; around 30% global supply I - Resource access changes R - some relocations, adjustments, potentially added costs. Impacts of shifts to aquaculture.

I - Greater disruptions to supply and quality, R - reorganization of elements, more aquaculture material, some systems may be less viable, more processing needed to protect quality.

I - Further extension of disruptions, R - need for relocation, re-organization, changing product streams, markets, process options.

More investment and competition impacts.

Small-scale drying/smoking activities Primarily linked with artisanal fishing, simple racks, kilns, packaging, local transport; around 10% of global supply I - Resource access issues, also water, fuel wood other inputs R - some shifts in location, markets, improved systems/operating procedures.

I - Greater impacts in similar issues/themes R - greater potential for change in locations, supply chains, impacts on producers and communities.

I - Further extension of risks and disruptions, greater livelihood impacts; R - options for improving markets, adding value, improving prices, more significant.

Commercial processing systems Wide range of facilities operating to defined health/ hygiene standards meeting market needs; range of secondary products; around 30% supply I - Resource access and quality changes R - some relocations, adjustments, potential added costs, possible shifts to aquaculture.

I - More disruption to supply and quality, more aquaculture material, some systems may be less viable R - need to develop wider range of products, byproducts, other options.

I - Further disruptions, R - need for relocation, reorganization, changing product streams, markets, process options. More investment and greater competition impacts.

Prepared food manufacturing and distribution Specialist food centres using/adding value to aquatic products, linking by range of transport to highly co-ordinated distribution systems I - Resource access/quality changes; impacts of other raw material R - some relocations, adjustment, potential added costs, possible shifts to aquaculture, changes in product forms I - More disruption to supply/ quality, more aquaculture material, some units may be less viable; R - need to develop wider range of products, adjust aquatic food content; new markets.

I - Further disruptions R - possible need for relocation, reorganization, changing process options, product streams, markets.

More investment and greater competition impacts.