--- 10.6 Transitioning to CSA ---

270 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 10.5 Progress of fisheries and aquaculture towards CSA At this stage, the definition and validation of CSA approaches for fisheries and aquaculture are in early pro- cesses of development and dissemination. Consequently, there is little experience as yet that can be used as a widely tested foundation for good practices. However, a number of underlying principles can be identified and applied, both to define concepts and to measure progress towards meeting agreed aims. To define progress in meeting CSA criteria, it will be important to select and use practical indicators that address the common needs of relevance, accuracy, accessibility and cost-effectiveness. Measures of ‘pressure-state-response’ as developed for sustainability indicators may be useful. These measures would establish connections between the nature and extent of climate change drivers, the state of the impacted system, and the response generated and applied through the CSA approach.

It will also be useful to apply generic indicators for CSA that cover such areas as the demonstrated continuation or expansion of output and quality, resource accessibility, food security, human nutrition and health, together with direct or indirect measures of GHG impacts. At the subsectoral level, various measures of resource use and impact efficiency such as fuel, energy, land or water use per unit of output, and GHG emissions per unit of output will also be applicable. A number of more sector-specific indicators may also be relevant. These may be used to varying extents in composite indicators, for example in cases where there may be social or environmental tradeoffs with more conventional production-defined indicators. These indicators would include criteria such as aquatic biodiversity, ecosystem status, gender equity and social dependence indices. Based on a defined range of such indicators, normative scenario building will be helpful for specifying the current conditions of the sector and the desired status over a specified period (assessments, monitoring and evaluation are discussed in Module 12).

Clearer definitions will also be required for the status and function of primary resources and their use in the fisheries and aquaculture sector. This will serve to determine the current status of the sector, trends, poten- tial acidification and climate change impacts and how changes in the efficiency of resource use are delivering social and economic benefits. 10.6 Transitioning to CSA The current characteristics and vulnerabilities of the aquaculture and fisheries sector to acidification, cli- mate variability and change can be identified. However, it is less easy to define the broad priority areas for action based on the potential impacts and adaptive capacity of different systems and the specific pathways and mechanisms for moving towards more robust and resilient systems. Nonetheless, based to some extent on equivalent issues in other food production and natural resource sectors, a number of points can be noted: • It will be critical to build capacity and improve performance in basic aquatic resource management to ensure underlying resilience in the face of uncertainty. • Incentives will be the key to CSA transitioning through social, legal, institutional, or economic and mar- ket-based incentives. Ideally, financial or other benefits will make CSA self-sustaining so that it will only require an additional impetus during the transition period. This impetus could be provided through access to improved fisheries and aquaculture techniques and materials, institutional change and strengthening, capacity building and the development of participatory monitoring systems. • Some elements necessary for the transition to CSA will require longer-term strategic investments in infrastructure, productive capacity, and improved products and services, including aquaculture stocks and feeds. This will be necessary to meet emerging needs and avoid losses. The case for these investments, and the rate at which these investments need to be deployed, will need to be assessed and tools for doing so will need to be refined. • Smaller-scale changes and response can be carried out locally with current resources and knowledge.

These changes can be extended relatively simply by supporting the sharing of knowledge and experience and through additional institutional strengthening.