--- Page 281 ---

268 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Strategic industry and subsector levels • Assess and define strategic investments (e.g. infrastructure for protection and enhancement of production and supply chain components). Define tradeoffs between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ engineering strategies (e.g. clas- sic infrastructure, such as roads, harbours, power, market and processing facilities and the service sector) and macro-level aquaculture protection, water supply and drainage systems, versus adaptation actions with minimal infrastructure costs. • Define and develop landscape-level interactions with other sectors that address hydrological planning, coastal protection works, and their links with aquatic habitats. Define and establish rules, tools and models for achieving this integration in ways that cover bioecological, physicochemical and sociopolitical issues.

Develop ‘smart’ geo-engineering approaches for building resilience and enabling productive transformation. • Provide strategic opportunities for newer forms of integration, such as managed aquatic systems and habi- tats that are linked with renewable energy and other forms of energy development. • Undertake subsector initiatives to identify and promote best practices, resilient supply strategies, and fo- cused R&D to reduce risk.

Local and enterprise levels • Define the local social, economic and policy context (e.g. economic dependence, livelihood options, human, social and financial capital, institutional context and capacity building options). • Use capital and operating cost models to explore implications of different scenarios (e.g. incidence and levels of flooding, rainfall and water exchange, temperature, salinity, aquatic system features, such as algal blooms, and disease transmission on aquaculture production). Generate viability profiles under different sce- narios, and where relevant, develop locationally based (e.g. geographic information system [GIS]) risk maps for key aspects. • Identify practical aspects of risk reduction, including physical modifications (e.g. physical structures and storm and flood protection), changing operating strategies, environmental management, diversified and segmented supply chains, cross-investments, diversified species mixes, input options and markets. Link old knowledge to new options and build capacities. • Where necessary, define and specify relocation options, policy and investment opportunities, livelihood alter- natives and opportunities for diversification.

Individual and community levels • Identify stakeholders and their roles and dependences, key risks and options, and their connections to cur- rent and emerging development objectives. • Define and develop local learning processes and exchanges of information that can be validated with clear performance indicators. • Develop and use information and communication technology for specific exchanges of ideas, information and options. Where possible, establish relationships with other communities to permit comparisons and the development of good practices. • Support effective participation in cross-sectoral negotiations and planning processes. • Develop external partnerships to provide specific technical and social support investment and resilience building.