--- Page 209 ---

196 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK In addition, overall land use and land use change accounts for about 31 percent of the total human-induced GHG emissions into the atmosphere (Scherr and Sthapit, 2009).

The overall efficiency of the agricultural sector– its resilience, adaptive capacity and its potential for contribut- ing to the mitigation of the effects of climate change and variations– can be enhanced by improving these con- stituent components. Indeed, by improving the efficiency of agricultural production, emissions can be reduced and sequestration capacity enhanced. Conversely, climate change will have a significant impact on crop pro- duction (Table 7.1), but alternative adaptation approaches and practices can address this by helping to reduce the net GHG emissions while maintaining or improving yields (FAO, 2011; Pretty et al., 2011).

Table 7.1 Examples of projected climate change impacts on crop production Event Potential impact Cold periods becoming warmer and shorter; over most land areas, days and nights becoming hotter (virtually certain) Increased yields in colder environments; decreased yields in warmer environments; increased outbreaks of new insect pests and pathogens; potential impacts on crop production Heavy precipitation events increasing in frequency over most areas (very likely) Damage to crops; soil erosion; inability to cultivate land owing to waterlogging of soils Drought-affected area increases (likely) Land degradation and soil erosion; lower yields from crop damage and failure; loss of arable land Intense tropical cyclone activity increases (likely) Damage to crops Extremely high sea levels increase in incidence (excludes tsunamis) (likely) Salinization of irrigation water, estuaries and freshwater systems; loss of arable land Source: adapted from IPCC, 2007, in FAO, 2008a 7.3 Sustainable crop production intensification Crop production has been evolving since the domestication of crop species 10 000 years ago. Varietal selection, the use of wild plants and wild relatives of plants, irrigation techniques, planting methods, cropping patterns and fertilization are some of the practices that have been, and are being, used to improve crop production. In relatively recent times, crop production has increased significantly, providing more food for a growing global population. The best known and documented example of this is the Green Revolution, which swept through much of the developing world during the 1960s. The Green Revolution was characterized by the planting of high-yielding crop varieties, with the associated chemical package and irrigation. As a result, farmers in- creased cereal food production from 800 million tonnes to over 2.2 billion tonnes between 1961 and 2000. While an estimated one billion people were saved from famine, this has come with a high price tag in the long term.

In many countries, decades of intensive cropping have degraded fertile land, depleted groundwater, triggered an upsurge in pests, eroded biodiversity and polluted the air, water and soil. Intensive crop production is no longer sustainable, and a new paradigm should emerge – and this is what Save and Grow – i.e. sustainable crop production intensification – is about (FAO, 2011). It means a productive agriculture that conserves and enhances natural resources through an ecosystem approach that capitalizes on natural biological inputs and processes. It reduces the negative impacts on the environment and enhances natural capital and the flow of ecosystem services. SCPI also contributes to increasing systems’ resilience – a critical factor, especially in light of climate change.