--- Page 517 ---

504 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Table 18.3 Examples of assessed benefits of CSA practices in contributing to climate change adaptation and mitigation, and food security • Reduced soil erosion and improved nitrogen efficiency from minimum tillage, cover crops and improved rotations; • Improved water availability from soil and water conservation activities; • Improved crop yield with new varieties, a change in farm management (e.g. planting date change, fertilizer, irrigation water use) or short-term weather and climate forecasts; • Improved livestock productivity through enhanced breeding and feeding practices; • Balance among improved productivity, market prices, and farm income through fertilizer subsidy programmes; • Improved economic resilience from income diversification; and • Reduced GHG emissions or increased soil carbon sequestration through better management practices.

Monitoring and evaluation for CSA programmes and projects Monitoring and evaluation are critical for ensuring CSA interventions are implemented properly and achieve the desired outcomes. Evaluations can also identify shortcomings and lessons for future policies and pro- grammes. The monitoring and evaluation framework and systems are designed once the assessments of cli- mate change scenarios have been made (see above) and when the CSA intervention options and detailed pro- ject or programme plans are being formulated. Monitoring and evaluation of CSA programmes and projects use as a starting point the baseline projections regarding climatic conditions, as well as the desired CSA ob- jectives from the policy and project design assessments. Monitoring and evaluation plans refine the indicators from the policy and project design assessments. The combination of primary data collected through various methods and analyses constitutes the evidence base that describes the start of the project baseline situation.

CSA activities for the project can also be prioritized using information from CSA options assessments.

Monitoring and evaluation are initiated at the project preparation stage of the project cycle (Figure 18.1) in the interplay between assessments, monitoring and evaluation activities. Here they are intimately linked through detailed and regular planning processes. In particular, impact evaluation frameworks should also guide the preparation of project and programme baselines. Shortly after appraisal of the project proposal and approval of the project, detailed indicators, baselines and targets are set, with clearly specified beneficiaries and well- defined interventions. Commonly used indicators covering a range of important CSA aspects are given in Table 18.4. Throughout the implementation of the project, the progress of CSA interventions is monitored, as is the use of resources and delivery of outputs. At mid-cycle and at the end of the project, impacts of CSA interven- tions on socio-economic, environmental and livelihood indicators are evaluated based on the baseline situa- tion and the initial expectations in terms of results. Ideally, project monitoring and evaluation should continue beyond the project cycle as some of the benefits of CSA may not be realized within the timeframe of a short project but only during a subsequent capitalization phase.

To further support CSA, it is essential during project implementation to monitor progress and identify success- es and problems of CSA interventions, be they pilot initiatives, projects or programmes. This monitoring will verify whether activities are meeting the CSA objectives and project milestones in a way that satisfies efficiency standards. It will also facilitate the adjustment of activities in the face of uncertainties. Within the project or programme, monitoring and evaluation promotes accountability and the wise use of resources. Good monitor- ing and evaluation helps improve the design of future CSA interventions and stakeholders’ decision making.

They are part of a long-term learning process.

Monitoring and evaluation, together with learning, can contribute to the achievement of national mitigation goals. Detailed monitoring of GHG emissions can be part of accounting requirements within the framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Table 18.4 shows examples of a va- riety of indicators that can be considered for the monitoring and evaluation for CSA programmes and projects.

The identification and selection of indicators are further discussed in section 18.4.