--- Community monitoring and national MRV ---

525
MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation
Participatory, gender-sensitive approaches in assessment, monitoring and evaluation that recognize that lo-
cal men and women are best suited to understand the conditions of local agriculture should be promoted. In
these approaches, men and women contribute to assessing the impacts of climate change on their livelihoods
and food security, and identifying and measuring their own indicators of change for monitoring and evaluation.
This creates opportunities to develop a learning partnership that involves all the implementing partners and
the participating communities. Participation in the assessment by the communities that are affected is critical.
This is not only for gathering as much information as possible on the local situation by drawing on the diverse
views within the community, but also for building ownership of the process by the community to increase the
likelihood of successful implementation of CSA methods.

Participatory planning, monitoring and evaluation are recognized as important in the broader development
context. They are used widely in rural community development interventions, and are particularly helpful for
understanding community perspectives on CSA opportunities and constraints, dealing with fine scaled vari-
ability and empowering local communities to engage in community-based natural resources management
(see Guijt, 1999 for a manual, and for an example on adaptation to drought through community groundwater
monitoring see FAO, 2008). Villanueva (2010) proposes an ADAPT process to assist in organizational learning,
monitor perceptions and promote organizational reflection and change.
Box 18.9
Community monitoring and national MRV
The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) has looked at the advantages of community monitoring compared to
expert monitoring for national REDD+ MRV. When communities are trained to use standard forest inventory protocols
for carbon stocks using IPCC recommended procedures, their monitoring can be reliable and more economical than
expert inventories. Engaging communities in monitoring activities strengthens their rights and their stake in REDD+.
The ownership of the data remains with communities and this increases their motivation for supporting REDD+.
Data collected by communities can also be used in stock assessments in national forest inventories and support the
information gathered at basic grid points.
See more at FCPF et al., 2009.
Monitoring and evaluation for CSA should be set within a broader development perspective. To avoid duplication,
monitoring and evaluation systems should be built upon and integrated into existing systems, programmes and
projects for agriculture, climate-responsible development and disaster risk reduction (see more in Module 15)
(Hedger et al., 2008; GIZ, 2011a). Within agricultural and rural development projects there are already many actions,
expected results and indicators that incorporate information on climate change actions and outcomes or that can be
enhanced by CSA actions with relatively lower costs (see FAO, 2012b). For guidance on participatory approaches, see
FAO’s Socio-economic and Gender Analysis Field Handbook (FAO, 2001).
Box 18.10
Role of ICT, Communication for Development
The role of information and communications technology (ICT) is important for implementing CSA, particularly for
monitoring and evaluation. ICT is central for the collection, processing and transmission of data, and for communication
among stakeholders. Global Positioning System (GPS) equipment used in project officers’ cameras can automatically
log the locations of the photos taken for later reference. GIS is essential in analyzing geo-referenced information.
Collected information can be logged in the database for monitoring purposes using simple structured forms based
on a markup language (e.g. XML) on mobile phones, mobile electronic devices and laptops.
For example, the Mobile Survey Tool, developed for the Ericsson Millennium Villages Project, is a tool that facilitates
data collection for agriculture, healthcare, business, finance and government. The tool enables operators and end
users to create and organize surveys and questionnaires without the need of coding or databases. The data can then
be processed and used for different purposes within a village or by governments.