--- Source: adapted from IFPRI, 2011; Parfitt ---

298
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Enhancement in value
Distribution, transportation and packaging

Consumer behaviour can influence the whole food chain to a certain extent
Food production
Post-harvest
handling &
food storage
Food processing
Food distribution,
marketing, retail
production
Food
consumption
Disposal of food
Involved chain actors:
• Farmers,
agricultural
labourers,
commodity
producers,
livestock holders,
fisherfolk
• Packers, millers,
crushers, refiners
• Processed foods
manufacturers,
artisan to global
Importers,
exporters, brokers,
wholesalers, small
grocery shops;
supermarkets,
restaurants, fast
food companies
• Consumers
• Consumers, waste
management
companies, local
authorities
Source: adapted from IFPRI, 2011; Parfitt et al., 2010
Possible practices and solutions to improve the sustainability
along the food value chain
Food production stage
Vegetable commodities and products
Pre-harvest cultivating and harvesting practices influence the post-harvest life of products due to decisions made
regarding what, when and how to plant and when to harvest (FAO, 1998). Pre-harvest production practices and
factors, including cultivation practices, quantity of water, type of soil used, may all affect post-harvest quality, shelf
life and post-harvest losses. Good post-harvest practices can also prolong the post-harvest life of particular fruits
and vegetables. However, this also depends on the conditions when and how the produce is harvested. In develop-
ing countries and sometimes in developed countries, food may be lost due to premature harvesting as farmers
may decide to harvest crops earlier, because they are food insecure or need to generate income. It may also hap-
pen that harvesting is undertaken too late or that losses occur during harvesting due to damage and/or spillage.
As a result, food may be lost and wasted during the production stage (FAO, 1998; FAO, 2011b; Prusky, 2011).
In the context of food loss and waste reduction, adopting good agricultural practices is key as well as following
specific rules when harvesting crops (see Box 11.1 below).
Good agricultural practices and rules of harvesting
Good agricultural practices involve adequate soil management, including management of weeds, crop protec-
tion and maintenance of crop hygiene. The latter involves the collection and removal of decaying plants, fruits
and wood that can lead to infections in vegetables and fruits, which may result in post-harvest losses and
waste. In addition, the amount of water provided to the plant, the use of fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides
can all influence the post-harvest quality and quantity of the produce and thus provide entry points to reduce
post-harvest losses (FAO, 1998; FAO, 2002).
The basic rules of harvesting with the aim to get the crops in the best possible condition to the market are:
• harvest during the lowest temperature of the day: early morning or late afternoon;
• do not harvest produce when it is raining or when there is dew, when the produce is wet it is more likely to
decay as well as it is more vulnerable to damage; and
• make sure to protect the harvested produce from sunlight if it cannot be immediately transported.
Livestock production and dairy products
Losses and waste in the livestock and dairy production sector may occur due to various reasons. During live-
stock production, losses and waste may occur due to poor feeding or diseases, e.g. swine fevers, tick-borne
and zoonotic diseases during breeding, which may lead to animal death. During dairy production, losses and