--- Page 126 ---

113 MODULE 4: Soils and their management for CSA • Potassium is important in various plant physiological processes, and most crops require it in larger amounts than any other mineral element, with the exception of nitrogen. The potassium content of dif- ferent soils is highly variable and depends on the parent material (the underlying bedrock or superficial deposits from which soils are formed). Unlike nitrogen and phosphorus, potassium is more dependent on the type and content of minerals than on organic matter. However, usually only less than one percent of the total potassium is present in water-soluble and exchangeable forms, and readily available for plant uptake.

Potassium uptake by plants is positively related to increasing (yet not exceeding optimum levels of) soil moisture, aeration and temperature. Suggested management practices for potassium vary with the type of crop and the potassium status of soils. This status should be regularly monitored with either plant analysis or routine soil testing procedures. A positive response to potassium fertilization can be expected when soil test values are in the low range. • Soil pH influences soil nutrient availability and biological activity. A soil pH level of 4 to 7 is acidic, while a soil pH level from 7 to 9 is alkaline. More fertile soils are usually between pH 6.0 and 7.0. Acidity reduces bacterial activity and consequently the decomposition of organic matter and nutrient release. Nitrogen- fixing Rhizobia and legumes generally do not do well in acidic soils. Also, strongly alkaline soils have sup- pressed biological activity and as a result fewer nutrients are available for plants. Strongly alkaline soils are also at risk of SOM decomposition, salinity, soil crusting and the accumulation of toxic levels of sodium and other minerals. Soil salinization is affected by climate change in that higher temperatures and evapo- ration rates increase the accumulation of salts (including sodium, phosphorus, calcium and magnesium) in the surface soil layers through capillary action. In addition, climate change may lead to higher rainfall, which will contribute to leaching out accumulated salts through increased drainage. Salinization is one of the progressive causes of soil degradation that threatens to limit plant growth and reduce yields on productive agricultural lands. High levels of soil salinity can only be tolerated if salt-tolerant (halophytic) plants are grown. Recent data show that globally about 11 percent of irrigated land is salt-affected, and about 53 percent of the global groundwater is also saline. In almost every irrigated area in the world, the groundwater is affected to some extent by salinity (Palaniappan and Gleick, 2009; FAO, 2011b). When the sodium ion predominates, soils can become sodic. This presents particular challenges because sodic soils tend to have very poor structure that limits or prevents water infiltration and drainage, and exacerbates the risk of erosion. 4.3 Soil principles for climate change adaptation and mitigation and enhancing resilience in different contexts Sustainable crop, grazing and forest systems can sequester substantial and variable amounts of carbon from the atmosphere and store it in soils and vegetation as indicated in Figure 4.4 (see also Modules 7 on crops, 8 on livestock and 9 on forests). The carbon sequestration potential of any soil depends on many vari- ables. When assessing carbon sequestration, rates should always refer to specific carbon pools, as each carbon category has a very different turnover rate. For instance, carbon accumulated in the first ten years is young and highly oxidizable. Soil carbon becomes more stable over time. In addition, to assess the effects of management practices on soils, it is necessary to have some reference base for similar soil types under the same climatic conditions. Undisturbed soils under natural vegetation should be used as a benchmark and used when comparing soils disturbed by human activities. In addition, data analysis should be carried out at the level of agro-ecological zones (Corsi et al., 2012) to take into account the effects of climate.