--- for Climate Smart Agriculture ---

Module 11:
Developing sustainable
and inclusive food value chains
for Climate Smart Agriculture

Overview
More efficient food systems are desirable from an economic, social and environmental perspective. This
module will look at the sustainable and inclusive food value chain concept and framework and how this
approach contributes to climate-smart agriculture (CSA) (section 11.1). Furthermore, information on
possible technologies and practices along the value chain is provided and possible interventions of dif-
ferent stakeholders are outlined (section 11.2). Finally, a step-by-step approach is provided to help chain
actors identify where improvements along the chain can be made to achieve sustainable and inclusive
objectives (section 11.3).
Key messages
• The application of the sustainable and inclusive food value chain approach directly links to CSA and
can help to improve performance along the value chain from input supply, to food production, to
post-harvest handling and storage, processing, distribution, marketing and retail, consumption and
disposal patterns of waste.
• Value is captured and determined by consumers when they buy the product, which trickles down to
production and support provider levels. In this regard, consumers, in particular those in developed
countries, have a large degree of power. Consumers’ awareness should be raised regarding reduc-
tion, reuse and recycling of foodstuffs that are still fit for human or animal consumption or other
purposes, including waste as compost or to generate energy from, such as biogas.
• Public support and investment, as well as public-private partnerships, are needed to ensure that sus-
tainable technologies and practices are adopted. This may be necessary because, for example, green
technologies may not be profitable in the short term, but socially and environmentally beneficial. In
order to overcome these short-term trade-offs, support should be provided to contribute to the trans-
formation towards an agriculture that is climate-smart. Capacity building should also be supported
to help smallholders adopt more sustainable production practices as well as to help them find other
uses (reuse or recycling) for their food waste, which can generate social (i.e. job creation) and envi-
ronmental benefits.