--- Page 87 ---

74 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK measured by their ability to achieve high yields per hectare and supported by public investments in physical infrastructure that is built by local populations. Institutional strengthening is needed especially at the municipal level to improve services.

This could be addressed by municipal taxes. Currently, citizens only pay national taxes, and funds to municipalities are allocated by the central government. This situation leads to a lack of accountability by municipal officials towards local populations. Policies for municipal strengthening can enable the active involvement of local populations in policy design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, which is important to ensure the effectiveness of efforts on the national scale.

On the subnational level, municipal structures, families, farmers, rural producers and community organizations are key institutions that need to be engaged to restore the Andean highlands and prevent hydrometeorological emergencies.

Because farmers determine land use and land-use change, they need to play an influential role in constructing institutional arrangements at all levels of government. This can be done by establishing producer cooperatives (large and small) that can give farmers a voice and a collective market influence. Cooperatives need to be supported by municipalities. Municipal government is the appropriate institution to provide a link between the government and civil society organizations in the region, as they are the only public institutional figures in many remote locations and have a cross-sector organization.

For communities, the key determinant for improved livelihoods is a strong physical connection to markets. Good road access to nearby rural towns and cities is paramount. Once road access is available, communities can participate in markets with products for which they have a competitive advantage. A second important intervention that needs to be planned and organized on the landscape scale is technology and knowledge transfer for more climate-smart and profitable practices. The adoption of modern sustainable agro-ecological practices (e.g. drip irrigation and micro irrigation systems, soil fertilization with organic manure, production of food for domestic use in home orchards) and the revival of traditional sustainable practices (e.g. pre-Hispanic terrace rehabilitation, construction of water infiltration ditches, insect repellent plants, native Andean crops) contributes to the resilience of landscapes and family farms. These practices are also part of successful strategies for managing disasters (e.g. protection against soil erosion and soil recuperation, prevention of hydro- meteorological emergencies). Communities are better positioned to ensure that sustainable practices are undertaken, as it is only through the full participation of all community members that damage to the vegetation cover can be avoided.

Planning processes for watershed management involving multiple stakeholders, including municipal and regional governments, can be institutionalized in the tropical Andes using an integrated watershed perspective. This was done in Peru, where the National Plan for climate change adaptation and disaster risk management (2012-2021) was developed jointly with regional governments using a watershed approach. Watershed committees (comisiones de cuencas), inter- municipal commissions (mancomunidades de municipios) and watershed users’ organizations involving rural populations as well as urban and industry stakeholders can play key roles in such processes. At the landscape level, watersheds can be favourably managed by intermunicipal commissions that create a chain of municipalities following the flow of water.

Previously, lack of public funding was a major issue for local governments in South America. Money is now flowing in, but it usually comes with constraints set by the funding source. Most local governments in Latin America heavily depend on fiscal transfers from central governments that exercise substantial influence over how finances are distributed. Funding is also commonly available from other sources, such as conditional cash transfer programmes, but these funds are not targeted to promote sustainable rural livelihoods and natural resources management. Fiscal autonomy of municipal governments would empower them to finance their own development and should be a long-term goal.

PES schemes (for more information see Module 14 on financing) is a financial mechanism that is playing a leading role in the improvement of livelihoods of upstream smallholders in the tropical Andes. An example is the Napo Province in Ecuador where a GEF project is supporting the implementation of a water fund that is operating a PES scheme for the appropriate management of páramos and catchment areas upstream so that downstream users have enough water for drinking and producing hydroelectricity. Another financial instrument that can empower citizens and focus public funds on sustainable natural resource management is participatory budgets, which allow citizens to participate in the planning and allocation for all or part of the municipal budget. Community involvement in municipal planning and budgeting strengthens local institutions and can overcome administrative inertia and improve the transparency and accountability of the elected officials.