--- of Energy for CSA ---

Module 5:

Sound Management of Energy for CSA Overview This section looks at the relationship between food and energy in a world where the climate is changing and competition for natural resources is increasing. This relationship is becoming stronger and more complex because the global agrifood system is almost entirely dependent upon fossil fuels and modern bioenergy is increasingly being looked to as an alternative to these fuels. Sound management of energy for and from the agrifood system could make a crucial contribution to making the transition to climate- smart agriculture and the achievement of food, climate and energy security. But this transformation can only happen if existing examples of energy-smart food systems can be scaled up significantly. Also required are adequate assessments of the effects of energy-based interventions in agrifood systems on sustainable development goals to guide decisions related to policy and practices.

Key messages • In light of increasing and volatile fossil fuel prices, the dependence of agrifood systems on fossil fuels represents a major threat to food security and contributes significantly to climate change. The challenge of reducing this dependency on fossil fuels can be met by up-scaling of energy-smart food systems. These systems improve energy efficiency, increase the use and production of renewable energy, and broaden access to modern energy services in agrifood systems. • More energy is generally used in post-harvest stages of the food supply chain, whereas most green- house gas (GHG) emissions occur in the pre-harvest stages. Nevertheless, there is greater synergy between energy-smart and climate-smart agricultural practices than may appear at first. This syn- ergy can be created through resource-efficient farming practices that reduce pressures on land use change, lower emissions embedded in the production of agricultural inputs, lessen the reliance on fossil fuels and enhance the productivity and resilience of agro-ecosystems. • Each intervention requires careful analysis. This must be done using a lifecycle analysis, which includes the intervention’s indirect effects, to assess the synergies and trade-offs among the various sustainable development goals related to energy, climate, food security and water security. • In developing countries, increased access to modern energy services in agrifood systems is often re- quired to improve productivity and income, and advance economic and social development. However, an increase in energy consumption, even if based initially on fossil fuels, may result in lower abso- lute GHG emissions. For example, improved access and greater use of modern energy services may reduce deforestation as the demand for traditional wood fuels declines, or create new economic op- portunities that displace unsustainable high-emission activities that are profitable only in the short- term, such as logging and charcoal production, or agricultural expansion. Increased access to energy is likely to reduce emissions per unit of food production or per unit of gross domestic product (GDP).

The effect of increased energy access on climate change mitigation should be assessed according to a county’s or community’s current stage of development and the development model that is being followed. It should not be assumed that there is always a trade-off to be made between energy access and climate change mitigation.