--- Page 431 ---

418 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK compromising gains made in food security. These hazards contribute to the difficulties in meeting the Mil- lennium Development Goal to halve the proportion of people who suffer from hunger by 2015. This includes geological hazards, such as earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanic eruptions; human-induced hazards, such as conflict, economic crises, high food prices; and traditional weather-related hazards, such as floods, drought and storms.

In 2012, over 18 million people faced food insecurity in the Sahel region of West and Central Africa (FAO, 2012a and b). The Sahel last experienced a major food crisis in 2010 affecting ten million people. In the Horn of Af- rica, the ongoing food security crisis, which began in 2011, has threatened the lives and livelihoods of over 12 million people.

In 2010, Pakistan experienced the worst flooding since 1929, with over 20 million people affected. The impact on agriculture was severe. Over two million hectares of cultivatable land and 1.3 million hectares of standing crops were damaged. Six million poultry and 1.2 million large and small animals were lost (World Bank and Asian Development Bank, 2010). Heavy rains during the 2011 monsoon season caused renewed and devastat- ing flooding that affected almost 10 million people. On average, households lost 66 percent of their cattle and 33 percent of their poultry. The flood also caused a significant increase in commodity prices, with the price of paddy increasing by 25 percent on average. At the same time, the purchasing power of labour decreased by 13 percent (UN, 2011).

Geological hazards also cause serious direct and indirect damage to agriculture and livelihood security. The Haitian earthquake caused nearly US$ 26 million in damages to the agricultural sector (Republic of Haiti, 2010). The destruction of the Haitian capital severely affected access to markets and other production infra- structure. This, together with the migration of over half a million people from urban to rural areas, put addi- tional pressure on rural livelihoods. In agricultural areas hit by the earthquake, debris and landslides damaged farmland irrigation systems, permanent storage facilities and processing centres, and the administrative and technical buildings of the Ministry of Agriculture. All these factors combined to produce sharp declines in income, food reserves and food availability, and helped trigger price hikes (FAO, 2010b; FAO and WFP, 2010).

The tsunami of December 2004, which affected 12 countries in the Indian Ocean, had a devastating impact on the agriculture and fisheries sectors. Some 40 000 hectares of irrigated land were destroyed by floods on the island of Sumatra in Indonesia, and in Banda Aceh nearly 70 percent of the small-scale fishing fleet and as- sociated gear was destroyed.

Frequently, disasters combine with other factors and underlying vulnerabilities to produce food insecurity and hunger. High food prices, which added 75 million people to the total number of undernourished worldwide in 2008 relative to 2003-2005 (FAO, 2008a), was the result of several factors including: the fuel crisis, slower growth in food production, lower stock levels, and increased use of agrofuels (IFRC, 2011). The current crisis in the Horn of Africa is the result of drought caused by erratic and failed rains over two rainy seasons combined with high food prices due to soaring fuel costs. In Somalia, the situation has been exacerbated by civil insecu- rity (USAID and FEWSNET, 2011a and b). In the Sahel, “a lethal mix of drought, high grain prices, environmen- tal degradation, entrenched poverty and other factors is behind the crisis” (FAO, 2012a).

Not surprisingly, countries in protracted crisis situations show high levels of food insecurity. Protracted crises are characterized by recurrent natural disasters and/or conflict, longevity of food crises, breakdown of liveli- hoods and insufficient institutional capacity to react to the crises. On average, the proportion of people who are undernourished is almost three times as high in countries in protracted crisis as in other developing countries (FAO, 2012a).

Food crises have become more frequent since the early 1980s. There have been between 50 and 65 food emer- gencies every year since 2000, up from 25-45 during the 1990s (FAO, 2008a). Climate change multiplies risk by increasing the number and scale of extreme climate-related events. Disaster risks and climate change produce similar negative impacts on agriculture, and both threaten to increase hunger over time. In addition,