--- United Kingdom estimates that ---

309 MODULE 11: Developing sustainable and inclusive food value chains for Climate-smart agriculture Box 11.5 Fermented left-overs and by-products transformed into nutritious food products in Indonesia Various waste products are fermented into nutritious food products in Indonesia. For example, tempe-bongrek, a protein-rich food is made by fermenting peanut and coconut press cake that remains after oil extraction.

The final product is similar to the traditional tempeh, which is produced through fermenting soya beans. Another example is ontjom, which is produced from waste groundnut press cake, tapioca waste and the solid waste of tahu. Primarily produced in West Java, ontjom is an important daily food consumed as a side dish especially by the lower income groups in the form of deep fried slices. In addition, semayi is fermented fresh coconut residue that is left over from the production of coconut cream or milk and extensively consumed in Indonesia.

Source: FAO, 1998 Reusing waste for human consumption and animal feed Food waste that is discarded may still be useable for human con- sumption (see Box 11.5) or as ani- mal and fish feed. These can be alternative food and feed sources that would not require the expan- sion of current food production levels. A study undertaken by the United Kingdom estimates that through exploring food reusing possibilities its dependence on raw material can be reduced by 20 percent by 2020 (WRAP, 2009). In the context of increasing efficiency these possible options should be further explored.

In some countries, developed countries in particular, due to safety and quality concerns, feeding food and animal waste to animals is highly restricted. In general, there is a high concern of food safety so meat and bone meal is forbidden to be used in animal feed due to the potential to spread Bovine spongiform encepha- lopathy (commonly known as mad cow disease). Instead some food waste could be turned into compost or biogas.

Reusing waste as compost Waste can be both organic and inorganic. Organic waste can be transformed into compost through a bio- oxidation process where the organic materials are broken done. The benefits of compost include: • The reduction of soil erosion, especially in areas where soils are exposed; • The increase of water retention in the upper soil layer; • The release of nutrients for plant growth; and • The suppression of soil borne plant pest and diseases. (FAO, 2007a) As a result of soil related benefits, the need for water, fertilizers and pesticides is thus reduced. Besides economic benefits, composting also has environmental benefits as organic material is diverted from land- fills. At landfills, bacteria break down waste in the absence of oxygen, which results in landfill gas that contains, among others, methane, a GHG that is more powerful than carbon dioxide in trapping heat in the atmosphere.

Generating energy from waste Many items typically thought of as ‘waste’, such as household waste, animal dung, agricultural residues, and processing water can be used to produce energy. For example, biogas can be produced through a process whereby organic matter is broken down by microbiological activity in the absence of oxygen. Waste products, such as used cooking oil and fish waste, can also be used to produce liquid fuels such as biodiesel. There are additional by-products of biodiesel production, including glycerine which can be used for soap production.

About one litre of biodiesel can be produced from one kilogram of fish waste (FAO, 2010c). The benefits of pro- ducing energy from products that are typically disposed are the increase in the efficiency of resource use for production and a potential additional revenue stream for producers (see also Module 5 on energy).