--- Capacity Development (CD): ---

548 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Capacity Development (CD): The process whereby individuals, organizations and society as a whole unleash, strengthen, create, adapt and maintain capacity to set and achieve their own development objectives over time.

Carbon dioxide (CO2): A naturally occurring gas, and also a by-product of burning fossil fuels and biomass, as well as land-use changes and other industrial processes.

Carbon finance (carbon market financing): Resources provided to projects generating (or expected to gener- ate) greenhouse gas (or carbon) emission reductions in the form of the purchase of such emission reductions.

Carbon sequestration: The process of increasing the carbon content of a reservoir or pool other than the at- mosphere.

Climate change: Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that can be identiﬁed (e.g. by using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability of its properties, and that persists for an extended period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or ex- ternal forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use.

Note that the Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in its Article 1, deﬁnes climate change as: ‘a change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods’. The UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between climate change attributable to human activities alter- ing the atmospheric composition, and climate variability attributable to natural causes.

Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event): The occurrence of a value of a weather or climate vari- able above (or below) a threshold value near the upper (or lower) ends of the range of observed values of the variable. For simplicity, both extreme weather events and extreme climate events are referred to collectively as ‘climate extremes.’ Climate-proofing: Ensuring that climate risks are reduced to acceptable levels through long-lasting and en- vironmentally sound, economically viable and socially acceptable changes implemented at one or more of the stages in the project cycle.

Climate-smart agriculture (CSA): Agriculture that sustainably increases productivity, resilience (adaptation), reduces/removes greenhouse gases (mitigation), and enhances the achievement of national food security and development goals.

Climate variability: Variations in the mean state and other statistics (such as standard deviations, the occur- rence of extremes, etc.) of the climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond that of individual weather events. Variability may be due to natural internal processes within the climate system (internal variability), or to variations in natural or anthropogenic external forcing (external variability).

Co-benefits: Multiple benefits in different fields resulting from one policy, strategy, or action plan.

Communication for Development (ComDev): ComDev is a social process based on dialogue using a broad range of tools and methods. ComDev is about seeking change at different levels including listening, establish- ing trust, sharing knowledge and skills, building policies, debating and learning for sustained and meaningful change.

Conditional transfers: Feature the provision of transfers in exchange of certain actions by beneficiaries, such as sending children to school or attending health clinics. Transfers include food, cash (i.e. ‘conditional cash transfers’) or vouchers.