--- Sources: Ying and Yanchuk, 2006; Hamann and Wang, 2006; Wang ---

177 MODULE 6: Conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture ecosystems change, the distribution and abundance of disease vectors are likely to be affected, which will have consequences for the epidemiology of many crop and livestock diseases (Pilling and Hoffmann, 2011; Jarvis et al., 2009).

Climate change threatens the crop and animal genetic resources that might be used in adapting production systems to future conditions. On the one hand, extreme weather events (e.g. heat waves, droughts and floods), which are predicted to increase in frequency because of climate change, can pose an immediate threat to the survival of breeds and varieties that are only raised in specific and very limited areas. On the other hand, as conditions change, varieties and breeds may be abandoned by farmers and livestock keepers, and may be lost forever if steps are not taken to ensure their conservation.

Climate change scenarios also indicate that genetic resources for food and agriculture will need to move geo- graphically, even from one country to another. The knowledge needed for the most appropriate use of those genetic resources, whether scientific, traditional or indigenous, will also need to be shared and made available to new users. The transfer of resources and knowledge will not simply be a natural and spontaneous process.

It will need to be implemented and supported by effective international cooperation.

Natural forests are unlikely to be able to migrate quickly enough to “follow” the climates to which they are adapted. At least in the short term, natural forests will have to rely on “plasticity”, the peculiar ability of trees to change their characteristics in response to changes in the environment without changing their genetic structure. In the future, some assisted migration is likely to be necessary. For example, trees can be grown in plantations, either as seeds or seedlings, and transported to sites where the future climate is expected to match their requirements. Although assisted migration of tree species and populations within species is rec- ognized as a potentially important response to climate change, the approach has not yet been widely used. The example presented in Box 6.1 is an exception (Loo et al., 2011) (see also Module 9 on forestry).

However, in some cases, moving existing genetic resources for food and agriculture and knowledge will not be enough. There will be a constant need to improve the level of characterization, selection, reproduction and deployment in the field of the suitable genetic resources adapted to the new climate. These activities will need targeted and forward-looking investments. Generating new knowledge in this area will increasingly be essen- tial to cope with climate change in the future.

Box 6.1 Changes in seed transfer guidelines in response to climate change: an example from Canada During the 1980s, the Canadian province of British Columbia adopted the concept of seed zones. Provenance trials were established for commercially important tree species, and the province’s forest land was classified on the basis of geography, climate and vegetation. The boundaries of seed zones were identified by relating the adaptive characteristics of the tree populations to the ecological classification of the land.

Increasing concern about the effects of climate change led to a new approach in which the potential effects of climate change were assessed using an ecosystem-based climate envelope model. The results predicted that tree species whose northern range limit lies in British Columbia could gain suitable new habitat at a rate of at least 100 kilometers per decade.

On the basis of this and similar work, seed transfer policies in the province were re-examined and British Columbia now claims to be the first jurisdiction to have modified seed transfer standards specifically in response to climate change. The modest modification allows seeds of most species in most areas to be moved 100 to 200 meters upwards in elevation. The new policy is an implicit recognition of the need for assisted migration to ensure that tree plantations in the province will be adapted to future climatic changes.

Sources: Ying and Yanchuk, 2006; Hamann and Wang, 2006; Wang et al., 2006; British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations, 2008