--- on capacity development in Module 17). In Peru, the Association for Nature and Sustainable Development ---

430 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK The scale of CSA activities can also be expanded through existing local, national and regional networks, knowledge fairs and South-South cooperation. Within traditional societies, the transfer of indigenous knowl- edge and technologies is often limited by oral communication and confined to local groups. If this knowl- edge is to have significant impact, external support is required to share these proven practices with a wider audience. Extension programmes and farmer organizations are recognized as viable cost-effective vehicles for the sharing of knowledge, the transfer of technology and know-how, and developing capacity (see more on capacity development in Module 17). In Peru, the Association for Nature and Sustainable Development (ANDES) is an indigenous NGO that has contributed to the establishment of the protected areas known as Indigenous Biocultural Heritage Areas. The Potato Park brings together six Quechua communities to protect a 12 000 hectare area as a microcenter of origin of the potato and other native Andean crops. ANDES works in close collaboration with formal and informal Quechua technicians in researching, training and developing adaptive management models for indigenous biocultural heritage. Working together, they organize South- South learning exchanges in the Potato Park for the design and implementation of indigenous biocultural territories as agrobiodiversity conservation areas (IIED, 2008).

CSA provides a fresh opportunity to tackle some long-standing challenges. For instance, there has been inadequate investment made to support and strengthen the coping capacity of pastoralists in the Horn of Africa. This is partly the result of the underestimated value of pastoralist systems as a viable way of life. It is also due to political marginalization of pastoral communities and adverse policies and practices, such as restrictions on their mobility and access to key natural resources (HPG, 2009a; IIED et al., 2008). Yet, the re- silience of pastoralist livelihoods has untapped potential that can be strengthened through CSA. Pastoralist systems can be an effective measure against rising temperatures and the increased incidence of drought ex- pected over the next four decades based on regional climate projections for East Africa. As one study shows: “...of all the natural resource-based land uses in the drylands, pastoralism functions best within the preva- lent context of wide rainfall variability and unpredictability... [It] has an important role to play where other livelihoods are likely to fail... Evidence suggests that…it would be more effective to enable and strengthen the inherent adaptive capacity of pastoralists, finding ways to encourage their autonomous adaptation...

Pastoralism is a rational use of the drylands. Pastoralists respond to and use, even choose and profit from, variability. This allows for a vibrant and productive livelihood system in some of the harshest landscapes in the world” (HPG, 2009b).

Combining DRR knowledge with innovations in climate change adaptation In addition to the expansion of indigenous knowledge and risk reduction practices as valuable measures to advance adaptation and CSA, there are other opportunities and benefits for combining DRR and CSA efforts.

Climate change creates risks that are not addressed by risk reduction measures (e.g. rising sea levels, in- creased temperatures and the expected spread of plant pests and diseases). In some cases, local knowledge is useful for reducing risks, but it is insufficient to cope with climate change. For this reason, local expertise needs to be combined with scientific knowledge, research and technological innovations. In practice, there are still only a few cases where DRR and climate change adaptation technologies have been combined. The example below in Box 15.7 on potatoes in the Andes illustrates how traditional risk reduction practices can be effectively combined with new adaptive technologies.