--- applied to CSA interventions. Examples include the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) ---

515 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation 18.4 How to implement monitoring and evaluation for CSA programmes and projects Basic overview of the planning, monitoring, evaluation and learning cycle For CSA, as in any other development context, monitoring and evaluation cannot be seen as separate from the programme and project planning cycle processes that define objectives and intervention actions that focus on expected results. Evaluation primarily deals with the assessment of results and impacts. Expec- tations for these results and impacts need to be set out clearly at the beginning of a project. Programme and project monitoring predominantly deals with tracking progress and intermediate results, and making adjustments during the project’s implementation. Also, monitoring and evaluation processes should not be isolated from the learning processes. For the programme and project to remain flexible, all three processes are necessary.

A number of manuals and e-learning tools are available for in-depth monitoring and evaluation that can be applied to CSA interventions. Examples include the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) Monitoring and Evaluation Guide (IFAD, 2002); World Bank’s monitoring and evaluation tools and approach- es1, with basic definitions provided by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Devel- opment Assistance Committee (OECD DAC) (OECD DAC, 2009); and the European Commission Project Cycle Management. Any monitoring and evaluation system needs to be developed using the process enumerated in the following paragraphs. The process is elaborated in FAO (2012b) and draws on work carried out by GIZ (2011a) that specifically looks at monitoring and evaluation of climate change adaptation interventions. 1.Conceptualization. Situation analysis will build upon climate impact assessments and CSA options as- sessments (see Figure 18.1), together with an initial review of resources, key institutions and implemen- tation mechanisms that form the concept for a detailed intervention, usually for a project or programme (see also Module 2); 2.Preparation and appraisal. Programme and project intervention planning and targeting sets the detailed framework within a wider programme and project cycle management. The project cycle management encompasses a wider framework of strategic planning, detailed project planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, learning and re-planning, and influences existing and new programmes. De- tailed planning activities that are important to monitoring and evaluation include: • Identifying the contribution to adaptation and/or mitigation: this helps to identify more specific areas for engagement and contribution, such as: adaptive capacity, adaptation and/or mitigation actions, and sustained development in a changing climate. • Forming an adaptation hypothesis and theory of change: this is required to delineate in a participatory, gender-sensitive way the possible options and their expected changes and results chains between activities, expected behaviour changes, outcome and impacts. These can then be formalized in the intervention design and process, often in the form of logical frameworks that outline indicators, as- sumptions and risks to achieving these changes. These will help define: -- inputs and activities (the details and resources of the actual interventions); -- outputs (the direct results and deliverables of the interventions which are required for the out- comes); -- purpose-level and intermediate outcomes (the expected external changes from the intervention); and -- higher-level outcomes or impacts that interventions may contribute to, usually affecting household and individual living conditions, and changes in the environment. • Developing adaptation and mitigation associated indicators: the indicators are developed in relation to the above hypothesis and changed expectations, and reviewed on a regular basis (see Figure 18.8). 1 For quick overview see World Bank, 2011. For more details see World Bank, 2004.