--- Agriculture Initiative Platform, which includes Nestle, Unilever, Group Danone, McDonald’s, Coca Cola, Kel- ---

403 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture form of market-rate loans or capital investments is almost exclusively targeted at climate change mitigation activities in the renewable energy sector and in industrial energy efficiency. The global share of private sector climate finance in adaptation, agricultural or otherwise, is currently still negligible (Buchner, 2011). Similarly, the exclusion of agriculture from compliance carbon markets limits direct private sector investments in ag- ricultural mitigation activities. Voluntary carbon markets, which are small but expanding, provide a channel for private CSA financing, but current volumes are still minimal, as discussed above. Overall, private sector investments at this stage provide “niche financing” that create positive impacts on CSA development at a case- by-case level, but do not play a large role in the overall landscape of CSA financing.

Nevertheless, there are a number of innovative private sector initiatives worth highlighting in this context.

Usually, these are driven by a combination of three factors: a) protection of a company’s value chain from climate change impacts; b) opportunities for increased profits through environmental certification schemes; and c) corporate social responsibility linked to a company’s image and self-understanding. These motives particularly apply to large, multinational food-product corporations with strong interests in increasing climate resilience of agricultural production within their value chain. At the same time, these multinational companies have much to gain from creating a premium price market for products certified as “climate-friendly”. Environ- mental certification schemes for food products are already relatively wide-spread and well established in sev- eral markets (Blackmann, 2011 and 2012). In comparison, climate change related product certification is still at its beginning. Highly publicized examples for companies’ individual or joint efforts in this regard include the collaboration of Coca-Cola and the WWF on sustainable sugarcane in Brazil (see Box 14.4). One of the already existing umbrella initiatives aiming at coordinating private sector efforts in this direction is the Sustainable Agriculture Initiative Platform, which includes Nestle, Unilever, Group Danone, McDonald’s, Coca Cola, Kel- logg’s, General Mills, and others.

Climate change related product certification is often particularly promising when catalysed through public cli- mate financing sources. In some cases, product certification can then also be linked to market-based carbon financing. One successful example is the Round Table on Responsible Soy (RTRS) certification initiative. This widely recognized standard combines a number of components including social and labour standards, biodi- versity, pesticide, soil, water use and others. The land use and zero deforestation aspect of the RTRS standard connect it to REDD+ carbon markets which again opens additional financing for further certification efforts, closing the virtuous cycle of public finance, product certification, and carbon markets (see Figure 14.6).

Box 14.4 Private sector: promoting the advancement of sustainable sugarcane in Brazil In 2007, The Coca-Cola Company and World Wildlife Fund (WWF) confirmed a joint commitment to improve water efficiency, reduce carbon emissions, and help conserve seven of the world’s most important freshwater river basins.

As a critical piece of this initiative, Coca-Cola affirmed the goal of advancing sustainable agriculture practices through promoting environmental stewardship and ensuring workplace rights. Among agricultural products, sustainability in the sugarcane supply chain (farm, mill, and refining processes) is a key priority for The Coca-Cola Company and a focal point of the WWF/Coca-Cola partnership. As such, they also worked with Brazilian Sugar Mill suppliers.

Coca-Cola and WWF have identified Bonsucro certification as a means of ensuring increased sustainability, and believe the newly formed standard will provide a globally recognized, third-party certification for sustainably produced sugarcane. Developed through an independent, multi-stakeholder initiative, the Bonsucro certification provides a mechanism for achieving sustainable production from sugarcane in respect of economic, social and environmental dimensions. Coca-Cola, in partnership with WWF, has collaborated with key suppliers to initiate activities that assist sugar mills to understand and work towards certification. As Coca-Cola and WWF support mills to meet certification standards, sugarcane producers will continue to benefit, with global implications of aligning the industry towards responsible and sustainable environmental stewardship.

Source: Sustainable Agriculture Initiative, 2010