--- Page 252 ---

Module 9:
Climate-smart forestry

Key messages
• Climate change and climate variability jeopardize the delivery of goods and ecosystem services from
forests and trees that are essential to livelihoods and food security, to environmental sustainability,
and to national development.
• Sustainable forest management (SFM) provides a fundamental foundation for climate change mitiga-
tion and adaptation and contributes to food security through various means. Climate-smart forestry
will require more widespread application of SFM principles. Mainstreaming climate change into
forest policy and practice will entail capturing synergies and managing tradeoffs with other forest
management objectives.
• Because information on local level climate change impacts and vulnerabilities is generally lacking,
strengthening local institutions and governance processes to improve capacities for sound forest-
related decision-making under uncertainty and supporting “no regrets” adaptation actions are
important strategies.
• Efforts to transition to climate-smart forestry will need to take place at all levels (individual/en-
terprise, community, national and regional) and time scales. Planning and implementation should
involve all stakeholders, be tailored to the local circumstances, address equity issues and be gender
sensitive.
• CSA in the forest sector will entail designing adaptation actions targeted at the most vulnerable com-
munities and sectors of the population (e.g. women, elderly, indigenous people) and forest systems
(e.g. dryland, mountain, coastal forests), focusing on the most efficient and cost-effective mitigation
options and capitalizing on adaptation-mitigation synergies.
• Forest and tree ecosystem services are often largely overlooked and undervalued, but will become
increasingly more important for human adaptation to climate change. Increased understanding of
these services and means to maintain and enhance them and policies to support their delivery will be
of heightened priority.
• Climate change responses, particularly mitigation policies, are leading to changes in markets for for-
est products and may drive substitution of forest products for more energy- or carbon-intensive prod-
ucts. Forest planning and management will have to be sensitive and adjust to such market changes.
• Clear definition of forest and tree tenure is important for the achievement of SFM and for adoption of
climate change adaptation and mitigation measures. Clarity of ownership of forest carbon and rights
to trade it will also be important to incentivize forest carbon projects.
• Forests and trees provide a range of forest products and ecosystem services. The benefits and costs
of these will accrue differently to different stakeholders, as will the benefits’ costs and benefits asso-
ciated with mitigation and adaptation actions. The costs and benefits associated with mitigation and
adaptation actions must be equitably shared to secure long-term commitment to their implementa-
tion.
• Forests are home to an estimated 60 million indigenous peoples who depend on them for their liveli-
hoods and have a wealth of knowledge about the forest resources. When undertaking climate change
mitigation and adaptation actions, it is essential to involve indigenous people in decisions on the
management of the forests and to ensure that their rights are recognized and respected.