--- Page 395 ---

382 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Focussing public sector spending on essential public goods such as agricultural research and development, rural transport and human capital development will allow countries to shift to more sustainable and climate- smart sources of agricultural growth. Analysis has shown that expenditures in these categories have consist- ently shown higher returns than expenditures on semi-private goods such as input subsidies (FAO, 2012a).

Yet public expenditures for such goods are still a high proportion of total public investments in agriculture for many countries (FAO, 2012a).

Thus, meeting the development deficit will require not only an increase in overall spending, but also a signifi- cant shift in composition of spending for many countries.

Investments for adaptation The need to adapt to climate change in the near, medium and long term implies changes in agricultural invest- ment needs ranging from the farm scale up to the national and international levels. There is more than one way of categorizing adaptation actions in agriculture. For example, in the fourth assessment report of the Intergov- ernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the nature of the changes required for adaptation was divided into two main categories: spontaneous and planned.

A more recent publication divides adaptation actions into three categories: adapting to the current adaptation deficit, adapting to incremental changes and adapting to qualitative changes (Brooks et al., 2011). The table below is reproduced from the report and gives examples of what is included in each category.

Table14.2 Adaptation categories, types and examples Category of Type of adaptation action Examples Addressing the adaptation deficit Resilience building • Livelihood diversification to reduce poverty in context of climate variability • Crop insurance, seasonal forecasting and other agricultural innovations including irrigation • Early warning systems for disaster risk reduction Adapting to incremental changes Climate proofing • Upgrading of drainage systems to accommodate greater runoff due to more intense precipitation • Adapting cropping systems to shorter growing seasons, greater water stress and heat extremes (e.g. through crop substitution, irrigation and new strains) • Improving disaster risk reduction systems to cope with more frequent and severe extremes Adapting to qualitative changes Transformational change • Phased relocation of settlements away from areas at existential risk from sea-level rise • Shifts in emphasis in large-scale economic activity away from areas/ resources threatened by climate change (e.g. away from water-intensive agriculture, climate-sensitive tourism, high-risk marine resources, to less sensitive activities) • Transformation of agricultural systems from unsustainable (under climate change) intensive rainfed or irrigated agriculture to lower input e.g. pastoral or agropastoral systems.

Source: Brooks et al., 2011