--- agricultural GHG (mainly CH ---

8 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK enhance soil carbon sinks. The IPCC estimates the global technical mitigation potential from agriculture could reach the equivalent of 5 500-6 000 tonnes of CO2 per year by 2030 (IPCC, 2007b). This is grossly equivalent to three quarters of the sector’s emissions in 2030 (around 8 200 tonnes of CO2). About 70 percent of this iden- tified potential lies in developing countries, 20 percent in OECD countries, and 10 percent for EIT countries.

IPCC estimates that nine-tenths of the global mitigation potential of agriculture is linked, not to reduction of agricultural GHG (mainly CH4 and N2O) emissions, but to managing land carbon stocks. This involves enhanced soil carbon sequestration, reduced tillage, improved grazing management, the restoration of organic soils and restoration of degraded lands.

Reducing emissions per kilogram of a given output3 might well be, for food security and agriculture, one of the main targets. Direct gains through increased efficiency also imply a series of indirect gains. These indirect gains include reduced emissions from deforestation (not accounted in IPCC’s calculations of the 90 percent) as less land is necessary to produce the same amount of food. Indirect gains also include reduced emissions from the production of fertilizer or energy inputs used on the farm. Everything else being equal, a potential reduction equivalent to 770 tonnes of CO2 per year by 2030 has been identified from reduction of fossil fuel use through improved on-farm energy efficiency (IPCC, 2007b). In addition, there are potential reductions through improved efficiency in food chains, including a reduction of post-harvest losses. 1.2 Towards more efficient and resilient systems To address these three intertwined challenges, food systems have to become at the same time more efficient and resilient, at every scale from the farm to the global food system. They have to become more efficient in re- source use: use less land, water and inputs to produce more food sustainably, and be more resilient to changes and shocks.

More efficient systems Increase resource efficiency Most of the GHG emissions of the agricultural sector are directly driven by the use of resources: new land being deforested or turned from grassland to crop land, fertilizers, livestock, energy. Increasing efficiency in the use of resources (i.e. producing more of a given output using less of a given input) is thus key to reducing emissions intensity per kilog of output. It is also key to improve food security, especially in resource scarce areas.

Before looking at how resource efficiency in food systems can be improved (by what means), we need to have a common understanding of what efficiency “means”.

Agriculture and food systems not only utilize a very diverse range of resources but also produce a very diverse range of outputs. They provide physical products but also income and employment, for farmers, in agro-indus- try and as a driver of the non-farm rural economy. From a food security perspective, these three outputs are equally important. It implies a more complex conception of resource efficiency, by which employment, which is formally an input in pure economic terms, can be seen as a key output. This conception implies a shift from the classical economic targets of labour productivity towards resource efficiency with labour intensity being pos- sibly an asset, as a system can be judged superior to another if it uses an equal amount of natural resources but provides more employment (and not less work related costs), everything else being equal. Agriculture is also a producer of environmental services at the landscape level: for example, through improved soil manage- ment practices, agriculture can increase carbon stored in soils. Ultimately the output of agriculture can also be defined as human diets. 3 Comparing different types of food is extremely difficult as they have very different nutritional value (not only energy or protein content but also composition and micronutrients).