--- Page 438 ---

425 MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience 15.3 Building on community-based approaches to DRR and adaptation CSA promotes integrated planning and management at many levels, including local site-specific landscapes.

The DRR and climate change adaptation communities of practice have complementary community-based ap- proaches that can support local-level CSA planning. In spite of their inter-connectedness, however, communi- ty-based disaster risk management (CBDRM) and community-based adaptation (CBA) are often implemented separately. Overcoming this division presents a challenge. Nevertheless, it is possible for CSA to articulate both of these community-based approaches and harness the benefits of this blended approach.

CBDRM was developed in the 1980s as a process through which at-risk communities can become actively engaged in the identification, analysis, treatment, monitoring and evaluation of disaster risks, to reduce their vulnerabilities and enhance their capacities. Communities, including the most vulnerable, participate in deci- sion making and implementation. In the CBDRM process, the assessment of hazard exposure and analysis of vulnerabilities and capacities (discussed in the previous section) forms the basis for activities, projects and programmes to reduce disaster risks (Asian Disaster Preparedness Center, 2004).

CBA has evolved more recently and has been applied to promote adaptation in the agriculture sector. CBA shares a similar definition and approach with CBDRM. It is understood as “a community-led process, based on communities’ priorities, needs, knowledge, and capacities, which should empower people to plan for and cope with the impacts of climate change.” (IIED, 2009).

Given the evolution and distinct history of climate change adaptation, CBA and CBDRM are differentiated in practice through separate projects and funding mechanisms. The need for an integrated approach is clear at the local community level, where multiple risks converge and threaten the lives and livelihoods of households and farming communities, and where solutions in risk reduction and adaptation in agriculture can be mutually reinforcing. CBDRM and CBA have the same objective of enhancing livelihood resilience at local levels, use the same bottom-up grassroots approach, target the same populations and apply the same participatory methods at the community level.

CSA should build on the valuable opportunities found in the short- and long-term measures that CBDRM and CBA offer through joint projects and partnerships at the local level. Through existing CBDRM practices, CSA can support measures that farmers prioritize because they address known and immediate risks and pro- vide tangible improvements to families’ food security. For local authorities, providing support for short-term risk reduction measures is more viable than investing in adaptation against future uncertainties. At the same time, CBA projects can complement these initiatives by addressing the longer-term impact of climate change through innovative measures. These projects may involve bringing scientific knowledge and climate change data and predictions to communities that would otherwise not have access to it. It may also involve addressing emerging risks associated with climate change, such as rising temperatures, changes in rainfall patterns, ris- ing sea levels, melting glaciers and other expected changes.

This blended approach enables more holistic local planning processes. It has the additional advantage of mak- ing available for CSA local institutional structures and partnerships already established for CBDRM and CBA projects, such as farmers’ networks, cooperatives, women’s groups, etc. and involving all relevant stakehold- ers in the local landscape (see also Module 12 on institutions). Initiatives that promote CSA can realize this approach by basing projects on a situation analysis that maps existing CBDRM and CBA initiatives, key stake- holders, institutional partnerships and local DRR projects. For local authorities, an integrated approach to CSA will help remove the administrative burden and cost of managing a diversity of CBA and CBDRM projects in an environment already facing institutional and financial constraints. Such win-win benefits optimize resources and make aid more cost-effective.