--- Page 188 ---

175 MODULE 6: Conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture 6.1 Genetic resources for food and agriculture Agriculture, including livestock keeping, forestry, aquaculture and fisheries, depends on the three components of biodiversity: the diversity of species, the diversity within each species and the diversity of ecosystems. The diversity of genetic resources for food and agriculture (i.e. plants, animals, aquatic resources, forests, micro- organisms and invertebrates) plays an essential role in meeting basic human food and nutritional needs and maintaining essential ecosystem services, such as pest and disease regulation. Genetic diversity gives rise to the diverse characteristics that enable different plants and animals to fulfill different roles in the environment.

Their genetic make-up also influences how they will respond to environmental challenges, such as extreme temperatures, drought, flooding and pests and diseases; it also regulates the length of the growing season and production cycle and the sensitivity of organisms to inputs, such as fertilizer, water and feed. Genetic resistance to pests, diseases and drought found within crop and animal genepools, have been key priority of conservation and breeding programmes to improve crops varieties and animal breeds.

High diversity of genetic resources may appear redundant at one point in time, it however may become impor- tant when the environment changes. Such redundancy will allow for the continued functioning of the ecosys- tem and the provisioning of ecosystem services because different genotypes perform slightly different roles and occupy different environmental niches (Lin, 2011). This is why the diversity of genetic resources for food and agriculture is essential for maintaining and enhancing the efficiency and the resilience of agro-ecosys- tems and food systems.

Centuries of selection and domestication by farmers and breeders, combined with natural selection, have led to the development of thousands of varieties of crops. For generations, this rich diversity has allowed people to obtain food and sustain their livelihoods in difficult terrain and under extreme climatic conditions. It has helped agricultural communities to cope with unexpected changes. Likewise, rural communities have developed live- stock breeds that can support livelihoods in some of the most inhospitable areas on Earth, from Arctic tundras and high mountains to hot dry deserts, where crop production is often difficult or impossible (see also Module 8 on livestock).

However, genetic diversity is being lost at an alarming rate. Among the main threats to biodiversity are climate change, loss of natural habitats and environmental degradation. Changes in consumer demand and the use of only a few species, varieties and breeds also contribute to genetic erosion. For example, it is estimated that currently only 30 crops provide over 90 percent of human food energy needs, and just five of them (rice, wheat, maize, millet and sorghum) provide about 60 percent of the energy intake of the world’s population (FAO, 2010c). While the number of plant species that supply most of the world’s energy and protein is relatively small, the diversity within these species is often immense. For example, there are an estimated 100 000 distinct vari- eties of the rice species Oryza sativa. Farming communities in the Andes cultivate more than 175 locally named potato varieties (FAO, 2009). In addition there are 50 000 to 60 000 species of crop wild relatives which are po- tential gene donors for crop im- provement. It is this diversity with- in species that allows for the cultivation of crops across many different regions and under many different environmental conditions (see also Module 7 on crop produc- tion systems).

Of the approximately 8 300 record- ed livestock breeds, 22 percent are at risk of extinction, and 8 percent have already become extinct (FAO, 2012a). Food production from live- ©FAO/PJ Mahler