--- The African Farm Radio Research Initiative ---

331 MODULE 12: Local institutions To provide some background, short summaries of the possible services key civil society institutions can offer are provided below.

Non-governmental organizations NGOs are typically strong in providing social services, especially when supporting poor communities (Swan- son and Rajalahti, 2010). For example, building social capital by organizing farmer groups to articulate their own needs and formulate solutions collaboratively, brings immediate positive effects at the local level. NGOs can also be valuable partners for implementing projects, conducting research and carrying out outreach activities.

Universities and research institutions Universities and research institutions are good providers of pre-training and in-service training for extension workers. As faculty members often conduct agricultural research of their own, they are obvious focal points for field staff in need of technical and management backstopping (Swanson and Rajalahti, 2010).

Private foundations Private foundations rarely aim to organize popular movements. However the funding they offer and the exper- tise they provide in specific activities are usually not influenced by the public sector and for this reason they often have scope for greater innovation (Uphoff and Krishna, 2004).

The media Mass media can reach large audiences with messages about CSA. Broadcast and electronic media include radio, television, film and the internet; print media includes newspapers, journals, publications; outdoor media includes posters, billboards and other materials placed in public view. An important channel for disseminat- ing informative and educational contents, media can both reflect public opinion and shape it. In recent years, more and more people, even in rural areas have gained access to media hardware such as radios, televisions, computers and smart phones. Innovative technologies, such as solar-powered electronic devices, are also becoming increasingly important in mobilizing the media for development purposes.

Religious institutions and communities The term ‘institutions’ does not merely refer to types of organizations; it also encompasses cultural and social norms and conventions. An awareness of public opinions and values is therefore important when formulating a CSA strategy. While religious institutions or issue groups are unlikely to provide CSA-related advisory services, they can offer indispensable insights into prevailing beliefs and values . They can be mobilized as powerful tools for advocacy and endorsement.

Box 12.5 The African Farm Radio Research Initiative Farm Radio International is a Canadian registered charity that combines radio with other ICTs to serve smallholder farmers across Africa. It transmits information on low-cost methods to improve food security to 360 radio stations across 39 countries. A recent study assessed the knowledge, attitudes and practices of farmers living in 90 communities across 5 countries (Ghana, Malawi, Mali, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania). The study looked at specific agricultural improvements that had been featured on participatory radio campaigns (PRCs) in their area.

It found that when agricultural producers were actively involved in these radio campaigns, more farmers tested and adopted new practices than when more traditional top-down, externally driven radio campaigns were carried out.

One in five farmers who listened to the PRCs adopted the agricultural innovation – an adoption rate five times higher than for farmers not exposed to the radio programme. The cost of a PRC amounts to pennies per farmer reached, making it a cost-effective information dissemination strategy.

Source: Farm Radio International, 2011