--- Page 25 ---

12 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK intensive systems4. A study on cow milk (Gerber et al., 2010) shows that the emissions per litre of milk are dependent on the efficiency of the cows: the more efficient the cows, the fewer emissions per litre of milk.

This increased efficiency should be pursued in all possible ways, from livestock selection and nutrition to manure management.

The selection to improve efficiency and thus reduce GHG emission of livestock systems involves numerous parameters, including productivity per animal, early maturity, fertility, feed conversion ratio and longevity.

In controlled environments, breeding for high performance has already resulted in significant reductions in the amount of feed per unit of product, especially for monogastrics and dairy cattle. The challenge now is to also improve productivity in more diverse environments (Hoffmann, 2010).

Improving animal health, including disease prevention and management, has a strong impact on the ef- ficiency of livestock systems, food security and climate change. Establishing strong veterinary institutions and policies are essential both to improve livestock efficiency and increase the preparedness against new risks, including those that result from climate change.

Nutrition plays a critical role in making livestock production systems more efficient. Proper nutrition is imperative for achieving high reproductive efficiency in animals, protecting them from diseases and making animal health interventions more effective. Imbalanced feeding leads to productivity losses and increase in emission of green house gases, either as CH4 from enteric fermentation in ruminants (between 2 - 12 per- cent of feed energy is lost in the form of methane) or as CH4 and N2O produced from manure. A balanced diet enhances animal performance and reduces GHG emissions per unit of animal product. Efficient nutritional strategies for monogastrics (pigs and chickens) include matching nutrient contents in feeds (taking into consideration both their level and availability to the animal) to the physiological requirements of animals; selecting feeds with high nitrogen availability in the animal body; and optimizing proteins and amino acids in diets to improve the feed conversion to animal products. For ruminants, techniques such as a) feeding of: diets balanced for nitrogen, energy and minerals - preferably as total mixed rations; chaffed forages, preferably of high quality; chaffed and water-soaked straws or urea-ammoniated straws; and grains- and b) use of feed additives, - e.g. ionophores, probiotics, enzymes, oils including essential oils, some tannins and saponins- can be used either to improve the feed conversion ratio and/or to specifically reduce methane emission and nitrogen release into manure.

Improving pasture productivity and quality, either by improving the composition of forage, especially in arti- ficial pastures, and by better pasture management is an important means to improve food security, adapt to climate change and reduce both direct and indirect GHG emissions. Supplementing poor quality forages with fodder trees, as in silvo-pastoral systems, or with legumes, increases their digestibility, thereby improving the production efficiency of livestock and decreasing methane emissions. The introduction of legumes in pastures also increases forage production and reduces pressure on forests without a corresponding in- creased use of fertilizers. Improved grazing management could lead to greater forage production, more ef- ficient use of land resources, enhanced profitability and rehabilitation of degraded lands and the restoration of ecosystem services. Grazing practices, such as setting aside, postponing grazing while forage species are growing, or ensuring equal grazing of various species can be used to stimulate diverse grasses; improve nutrient cycling and plant productivity and the development of healthy root systems; feed both livestock and soil biota; maintain plant cover at all times; and promote natural soil forming processes. 4 Types of systems and size are not necessarily associated.