--- Electricity; Mechanical Power; Solid; Liquid and Gaseous Fuels ---

143 MODULE 5: Sound Management of Energy for CSA 5.1 Introduction – Energy and the agrifood system Global primary energy demand will increase by a third between 2010 and 2035, and today’s developing coun- tries will account for the majority of this demand (IEA, 2011a). Fossil fuels are expected to continue to meet the bulk of the primary energy requirements. However, the use of renewable energy is increasing and will continue to do so in the future.

Over the last decade, crude oil prices have fluctuated around a generally steadily increasing trend line, from US$ 28 per barrel to US$ 120. There was one dramatic price spike in 2008. Conversely, the costs of renewable energy have been declining recently. This trend will continue in the coming decades, and renewable energy will become more and more competitive.

The gap between energy needs and access to energy is large, and demand will certainly increase as countries develop. The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that a fifth of the world’s population lacks access to electricity and that two-fifths rely on traditional biomass for cooking. The use of biomass for cooking is a severe cause of high indoor air pollution, which has harmful health effects for rural households, especially for women (IEA, 2011a). Increasing energy access is essential if the poverty reduction targets set out in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) are to be met.

Agriculture and energy have always been closely interlinked. These linkages have changed and grown stronger over time. Agriculture, including forestry, has always been a traditional source of energy (through bioenergy), while fossil fuels have become a major input in modern agricultural production. The energy generated by the agrifood system can be partially used in the food supply chain or exported outside the system (e.g. through the sale of biogas produced on-farm to local households, or through the generation of electricity from residues to feed the national energy grid).

These two-way linkages between energy and agriculture - the energy for and from the agrifood sector, are il- lustrated in Figure 5.1.

Figure 5.1: Energy FOR and FROM the Agrifood System } ENERGY: Electricity; Mechanical Power; Solid; Liquid and Gaseous Fuels FOOD AND ENERGY LOSSES FOOD Crop production Energy Livestock Fish Production Processing Post-Harvest Storage Distribution Retail Preparation Cooking INDIRECT ENERGY Energy outside the agrifood system Source: Based on FAO’s current work being done through the Energy-Smart Food for People and Climate Programme (see FAO, 2011a and b), the food sector1 currently accounts for around 30 percent of the world’s total end-use energy consumption.2 More than 70 percent of that energy is used beyond the farm gate (Figure 5.2). Countries with a high GDP use a greater portion of this energy for processing and transport. In low-GDP countries, cooking consumes the highest share. 1 In this context, food sector concerns only those parts of “agriculture” in the broad FAO sense (i.e. agriculture, forestry and fisheries) that produce food, as well as the food processing, distribution, retail, preparation and cooking phases. 2 Energy includes direct energy used at the operational level primarily on farms and processing plants, for example for irrigation, land preparation and harvesting as well as indirect energy that is not directly consumed to operate farms, in fishing or processing plants but required to manufacture other inputs such as machinery, fertilizers and pesticides.