--- 3.	Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs); ---

394 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 1.Total funding falls well short of developing countries’ needs. This overall resource constraint presents a problem for climate finance as a whole, but it is especially pronounced for CSA activities. Thus far, the lion’s share of climate financing from public sources as well as almost all private sector climate financing flows into mitigation activities in the industrial and energy sectors. Adaptation financing, with a signifi- cant part targeting agriculture activities, is small in comparison to mitigation financing. Consequently, the financing need-supply gap is especially large for CSA. 2.The disjointing of mitigation and adaptation in UNFCCC negotiations has traditionally been reflected in a separation of corresponding funding sources. CSA draws its strength from the utilization of synergies be- tween mitigation and adaptation, but few of the existing financing options provide clear funding channels for integrated activities. 3.While adaptation financing is strongly connected to agricultural investments, greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions from agricultural practices have no equally prominent role in the international financing of mitigation activities. (Buchner, 2011) Fortunately, all of these obstacles are already in the process of being removed or will potentially be lowered in the mid-term future. Existing funding mechanisms have started to move towards a more integrated view of adaptation and mitigation. Accordingly, funding eligibility criteria are changing to more readily accommodate combinations of adaptation and mitigation financing. The increasingly cross-cutting perspective also extends to the combination of climate change with other related areas such as forest management, biodiversity or land degradation. This shift bodes well for integrative approaches like CSA. Regarding the overall availability of resources, all eyes are on the Green Climate Fund (GCF), which was created with the expectation to disburse US$ 100 billion annually by the year 2020. Furthermore, in the UNFCCC the “Terms of reference for the design of the Green Climate Fund” in paragraph 1(c) states the “objective of achieving a balanced allocation between adaptation and mitigation” (UNFCCC, 2010) pointing towards an adjustment in the distribution at least of public climate financing in favour of adaptation. Even if these ambitious goals are not met, the GCF has the potential to ease at least some of the constraints on climate finance availability in general and adaptation financing in particular. Until then, developing countries can consider two interlinked paths of action: first, to access exist- ing climate financing for agriculture, thereby facilitating CSA advances while creating a basis for accessing future funding and second, to prepare for accessing future GCF funds by building a tailored project pipeline, improving policy and legal foundations, and creating necessary implementation capacity. Both require a good understanding of existing finance options for CSA as well as current developments.

The existing climate finance options for CSA The landscape of CSA financing options is complex, featuring a multitude of funding channels with different objectives and eligibility criteria. Financing options specifically targeting CSA are still limited, necessitating a strategic use and combination of existing funding sources. The basis for any CSA activity should be the iden- tification of a country’s opportunities and vulnerabilities, corresponding needs and preferred options for CSA activities. After national priorities have been defined, a strategic approach to sources of international finance based on an understanding of available channels will not only increase the chances for approval, but also en- hance the fit between the finance option and the country’s overall approach to climate change in agriculture.

Without making the futile attempt to cover all available sources of international climate finance, this section will provide an overview of six categories of important climate finance options provided by: 1.Financing mechanisms directly under the UNFCCC; 2.United Nations (UN) organizations or programmes; 3.Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs); 4.Bilateral public financing channels; 5.Compliance and voluntary carbon markets; and 6.Private sector actors and philanthropy.