--- Agricultural Innovation System: ---

547 Glossary Glossary Adaptation (to climate change): Adjustments to current or expected climate variability and changing average climate conditions. This can serve to moderate harm and exploit beneﬁcial opportunities. Various types of adaptation can be distinguished, including anticipatory and reactive adaptation, private and public adaptation, and autonomous and planned adaptation.

Adaptive assessment: The practice of identifying options to adapt to climate change and evaluating them in terms of criteria such as availability, benefits, costs, effectiveness, efficiency and feasibility.

Adaptation benefits: Avoided damage costs or accrued benefits following the adoption and implementation of adaptation measures.

Adaptive capacity: The ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate variability and ex- tremes) to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.

Afforestation: The conversion from other land uses into forest, or the increase of the canopy cover to above the 10 percent threshold.

Ageing of soils: Deposition of polysaccharides and other organic cementing agents by microbial activity in soil.

Agricultural Innovation System: A system of individuals, organizations, and enterprises focused on bringing new products, processes and forms of organization into social and economic use to achieve food and nutrition security, economic development, and sustainable natural resource management.

Agro-ecology: An ecological approach to agriculture that views agricultural areas as ecosystems and is con- cerned with the ecological impact of agricultural practices.

Agro-ecosystem: The organisms and environment of an agricultural area considered as an ecosystem.

Anaerobic digestion: Anaerobic Digestion is a natural process in which micro-organisms break down organic matter, in the absence of oxygen, into biogas (a mixture of carbon dioxide and methane) and digestate (a nitrogen-rich fertiliser).

Annex I countries: The group of countries included in Annex I (as amended in 1998) to the Framework Con- vention on Climate Change, including all the OECD countries and economies in transition. Under Articles 4.2 (a) and 4.2 (b) of the Convention, Annex I countries committed themselves specifically to the aim of returning individually or jointly to their 1990 levels of greenhouse gas emissions by the year 2000. By default, the other countries are referred to as Non-Annex I countries.

Agricultural biodiversity (agrobiodiversity): It is the result of natural selection processes and the careful se- lection and inventive developments of farmers, herders and fishers over millennia. Agrobiodiversity is a vital sub-set of biodiversity.

Aquifer: A water bearing stratum of permeable rock, sand or gravel.

Bagasse: Residues consisting of the fibrous portion of the sugar cane after the juice has been extracted. Used as fuel in sugar mills, as animal feed and in paper production.

Biodiversity: The total diversity of all organisms and ecosystems at various spatial scales (from genes to entire biomass).