--- Suchiate, Coatán and Cahoacán Rivers on the border area between the department of San Marcos, Guate- ---

432 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK tion reduces the goods and services available to local communities, shrinks economic opportunities and livelihood options, and ultimately contributes to greater food insecurity and hunger (FAO, 2011b).

Effective risk reduction depends significantly on the ability to promote sound environmental and natural re- source management practices and the sustainable use of ecosystems. Healthy and diverse ecosystems are more resilient to natural hazards. Forests and reforestation are used as shelterbelts and windbreaks, and play an important role in protecting against landslides, floods and avalanches. Trees stabilize riverbanks and mitigate soil erosion (see also Module 9 on climate-smart forestry). Wetlands serve to store water and provide storm protection, flood mitigation, shoreline stabilization and erosion control (FAO, 2011b).

There are numerous examples of ecosystem approaches that have been promoted through risk reduction measures. Since the 1960s, Bangladesh has been investing in coastal afforestation and creating coastal green belts, such as mangroves, to reduce the impact of cyclones and tidal surges. In the watersheds of the Suchiate, Coatán and Cahoacán Rivers on the border area between the department of San Marcos, Guate- mala, and the state of Chiapas, Mexico, integrated watershed management is helping to restore ecosystems through soil conservation and sustainable agricultural practices by securing downstream water supply to settlements, agriculture and livestock, reversing watershed degradation and reducing the risk of devastat- ing floods caused by tropical storms and hurricanes. Sri Lanka’s Road Map for Disaster Risk Reduction outlines a range of activities that integrate both risk reduction and environmental management objectives, including the integration of DRR in environmental impact assessments and the promotion of coastal vegeta- tion or green belts (PEDRR and The Council of Europe, 2010).

Recognizing the interconnectedness between risk reduction and good environmental stewardship, the HFA identifies the “reduction of the underlying risk factors” as one of its five Priorities for Action. One of the key areas emphasized under this priority for action is environmental and natural resource manage- ment, which includes the following objectives: encourage the sustainable use and management of eco- systems; implement integrated environmental and natural resource management approaches that incor- porate DRR; and promote the integration of risk reduction associated with existing climate variability and future climate change into strategies for the reduction of disaster risk and adaptation to climate change (UNISDR, 2005).

Ecosystem-based approaches are also well recognized as a critical element of adaptation by the UNFCCC and constitute a fundamental pillar in CSA (see for example Module 10 on climate-smart fisheries and aq- uaculture). Ecosystem services will become more vulnerable and fragile as climate change affects rainfall patterns and increases surface temperatures. Existing ecosystem-based DRR measures can strengthen ad- aptation efforts under CSA. Some examples of initiatives that combine DRR and climate change adaptation objectives are starting to emerge. In Mexico, for example, a large-scale coastal wetland and mangrove swamp restoration project is addressing coastal protection against hurricanes and saltwater intrusion due to rising sea levels (PEDRR and The Council of Europe, 2010). The project is also improving local water supply and food production. Box 15.8 illustrates a watershed management approach in Uganda that integrates DRR and climate change adaptation in project design.