--- dition, Australia’s Aid Program also provides CSA relevant financing through its Adaptation to Climate Change ---

401 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture its specific focus and purpose. The International Forest Carbon Initiative strives to demonstrate feasibility and create a solid basis for the inclusion of REDD+ in a Post-Kyoto global climate change agreement. Accordingly, the International Forest Carbon Initiative provides financing for pilot REDD+ activities, enhancement of forest carbon monitoring and accounting systems, and the development of market-based REDD+ approaches. In ad- dition, Australia’s Aid Program also provides CSA relevant financing through its Adaptation to Climate Change Initiative.

Carbon markets Despite all the difficulties with its implementation, the concept of putting a price on GHG emissions and in- stalling a market-based price-setting mechanism through certificate trading provides a powerful instrument of climate finance. Carbon markets could possibly be a large source of international funding for CSA activi- ties. However, the inclusion of carbon credits from agricultural GHG reductions in compliance with carbon markets has been a matter of continuous controversy for at least two decades. The scope of this module does not allow for a full presentation of the complex debate on agricultural carbon credits. However, this is a list of some of the central concerns: a) challenge of MRV and related difficulties to ensure environmental integrity with respect to possible leakage, uncertain permanence and additionality of GHG reductions; b) high transaction costs, especially through the coordination of large numbers of smallholder farmers that would be required to make soil carbon Certified Emission Reductions profitable; c) high opportunity costs through the diversion from conventional climate change efforts towards the complex process of achieving carbon market readiness; d) concerns about the potentially adverse effect on food security through increases in food price volatility and displacement of food production in favour of more effective carbon sinks; e) questions about the use of untested technologies to create easily calculated GHG reduction. These issues are usually embedded in a more general rejection of carbon markets as a tool for agricultural mitigation, highlighting the unstable situation of carbon markets overall and concerns about shifting the burden of emission reductions to devel- oping countries.

The combination of these and other concerns led to the exclusion of carbon reductions from soil carbon man- agement in croplands and grassland from the Clean Development Mechanism. Consequently, the existing compliance carbon markets have ruled most agricultural carbon credits as ineligible for trading. Most im- portantly, the European Union’s Emissions Trading System, being the world’s dominant source of demand for Certified Emission Reductions, does not accept carbon credits from soil management activities. The exclusion of large parts of agricultural mitigation potential from the Clean Development Mechanism and compliance markets also prevent the development of a comprehensive set of approved baseline and monitoring methodol- ogy to determine the amount of generated Certified Emission Reductions. One notable exception is methane avoidance through manure management, which has witnessed an exceptional level of activity after the Clean Development Mechanism introduced a manure methodology in 2006. The amount and proportion of Clean Development Mechanism manure projects dropped sharply after 2006, but continue to provide niche financ- ing. Overall, however, the agricultural sector lags years behind the industrial and energy sectors with large Certified Emission Reductions markets and a corresponding wealth of approved methodologies, experiences and knowledge. However, for the time being, compliance carbon markets do offer limited opportunities for CSA financing (World Bank, 2011).

Voluntary carbon markets have been somewhat more inclined to include carbon credits from land use, land- use change and forestry activities (PwC and Rockefeller Foundation, 2011). The majority of credits derives, however, from REDD activities, with carbon reductions from CSA still playing a very limited role. Some of the major voluntary carbon market standards like Verified Carbon Standard or the American Carbon Registry al- low for carbon credits from CSA activities. Also, in the emerging voluntary carbon market in China, based on its first domestic carbon standard, the Panda Standard, GHG reductions from agriculture, forestry and other land use are explicitly promoted (UNEP Riso Centre, 2011). In consequence, a broader spectrum of certifica- tion methodologies for CSA credits has been developed under these standards including for agro-forestry, integrated farm energy systems, nutrient management, rice system management, tillage and residue man- agement and watershed restoration.