--- Step 3:	 Measure performance ---

312 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Step 3: Measure performance Measure the impact in terms of economic, social and environmental intended outcomes: • Measure the impact of the development strategy in terms of its economic, social, and environmental out- comes in relation to the vision developed under step 2.

In this way, the impact assessment then contributes to understanding the performance of the chain in a con- tinuous development cycle.

Conclusions This module has described the sustainable and inclusive food value chain approach. This approach can sup- port the transformation of the agricultural sector to become climate-smart so that current food security and climate change challenges can be successfully addressed.

The sustainable and inclusive food value chain approach focuses on three sustainability dimensions – econom- ic, social and environmental— which are directly linked to three pillars of CSA. This approach can contribute to CSA by helping to identify interventions at every stage of the food value chain to enhance the performance of the chain.

Through understanding, improving and measuring performance, waste streams that occur along the food val- ue chain can be analysed. This includes not only reducing food losses and waste, but also looking at reusing and recycling food stuffs that still have an economic value as they can serve other uses, such as reusing waste for human consumption or animal feed, as compost or to generate energy. This not only provides economic benefits, but also social (i.e. employment generation) and environmental benefits.

This module has provided an overview of different practices and technologies that chain actors can adopt along the chain in order to improve their performance across the triple bottom line. At times, there can be short-term trade-offs, for example, a green technology may not be profitable in the short run, but it may provide social and environmental benefits. If this is the case, public sector support and investment as well as public-private partnerships may be necessary to overcome these trade-offs. Other areas where public intervention may be needed include awareness raising, agricultural research and development as well as capacity building support in order to help smallholders adopt more sustainable practices that are climate smart and help consumers to reduce, reuse or recycle their waste.

Furthermore, this module has outlined a step-by-step approach of how chain actors can analyze their inter- ventions along the sustainable and inclusive food value chain with the aim to improve their performance in all three sustainability dimensions—economic, social and environmental.

Notes This module was written by Tamara van‘t Wout (FAO) and Reuben Sessa (FAO) with contributions from Martin Hilmi (FAO), David Neven (FAO), Robert van Otterdijk (FAO), Camelia Bucatariu (FAO), Danilo Meja (FAO), Jogeir Toppe (FAO), Lucio Olivero (FAO), Sandra Corsi (FAO) and Alashiya Gordes (FAO).