--- Strengthening climate resilience in the Kafue River Basin in Zambia under the PPCR ---

399 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture Fund currently has 41 projects and US$ 2.3 billion of resources approved (US$ 5.2 billion pledged), providing financing for renewable energy, sustainable transport, and energy efficiency. The Clean Technology Fund does not provide a clear channel for GHG reduction from the agricultural sector. Again, the comparably small role of the agricultural sector in mitigation financing is reflected in the priority setting of the Climate Investment Funds. The Strategic Climate Fund comprises three targeted programmes. The Programme for Scaling-Up Renewable Energy in Low Income Countries targets the realization of low carbon pathways in six pilot coun- tries’ energy sectors and has received US$ 505 million in pledges. No Scaling-Up Renewable Energy in Low In- come Countries project has been approved yet and they would not provide clear financing options for CSA. The Forest Investment Programme thus far has received US$ 639 million in pledges for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in eight pilot countries. It is more closely connected to CSA activities from a landscape perspective, but no projects have been approved at this point. The Pilot Program for Climate Re- silience (PPCR) is the part of the Climate Investment Funds that represents the most direct financing option for CSA activities. Financing under the PPCR is, however, earmarked for climate adaptation activities. In addition, PPCR funding is concentrated on nine pilot countries and two pilot regional initiatives9 and only these countries are eligible for PPCR funding. Given the small pool of eligible countries, the available PPCR resources per country are much larger than through other funding channels, opening extraordinary opportunities for the pilot countries. With the approach of resource concentration, the PPCR aims to provide significant investments nec- essary to achieve comprehensive sector-wide transitions towards increased climate resilience. Naturally, the agricultural sector is of high priority under the PPCR. Eligible countries thus have a unique chance to receive significant funding for deploying a CSA approach at a large scale. For PPCR pilot countries, this represents an opportunity that is not to be missed. In addition, the PPCR supported transformations of agricultural sectors will be among the first examples at this scale and will potentially serve as crucial examples for the future of climate finance under the GCF.

In addition to the jointly implemented CIFs, the MDBs also administer their own specific climate change fi- nancing mechanisms. Among these, the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility of the World Bank has already been mentioned as complementary to the UN REDD programme, leading in the area of economic analysis for REDD strategies including pilots on performance-based incentive payment systems. Examples for climate fi- nance mechanisms managed by Regional Development Banks include the African Development Bank’s Congo Basin Forest Fund addressing deforestation in the Congo basin, as well as the Asian Development Bank’s Clean Energy Financing Partnership Facility targeting policy, regulatory and institutional reform promoting clean energy development.

Bilateral public financing channels Bilateral instruments remain one of the primary sources of climate finance. Analysis provided by the Climate Policy Initiative estimates that total annual climate finance to developing countries through bilateral sources 9 PPCR Pilot Countries and Regions: Bangladesh, Bolivia, Cambodia, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Tajikistan, Yemen, Zambia; Caribbean Region (Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines) and the Pacific Region (Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Tonga).

Box 14.2 Strengthening climate resilience in the Kafue River Basin in Zambia under the PPCR The Kafue River Basin is a sub-basin of the Zambezi River Basin and a headwater catchment located entirely within Zambia. The impacts of climate change are projected to increase the variability of precipitation in the area, exacerbating problems caused by drought and flooding. One of the PPCR project sub-components focuses on fostering sustainable water and land management, agricultural and pastoral practices that help local communities to better address the current and future impacts of climate change and variability. It would finance climate resilient Integrated Development Plans and Local Area Plans. The PPCR will assist communities to implement such plans in partnership with non-governmental organizations and other development agencies.

Source: PPCR, 2011