--- Fertilizer manufacture releases GHG into ---

133 MODULE 4: Soils and their management for CSA Conventional practices Practices to enhance Productivity and Adaptation Practices to enhance mitigation Fertilizer use:

A shortage of any one of the nutrients required for plant growth can limit crop yields.

Increased productivity is needed to meet current and future food demand.

However, fertilizer use efficiency tends to decrease with increasing applications as a great part of the nutrients are not taken up by the crop but released into water bodies and emitted into the atmosphere.

Fertilizer manufacture releases GHG into the atmosphere.

Integrated soil fertility management (ISFM) aims to make available required soil nutrients by balancing different on- farm soil organic sources (amendments) with nutrients from mineral fertilizers (to address deficiencies) and reducing nutrient losses through soil and water conservation. It aims to: • Maximize the use of organic matter that provides nutrients, sequesters C and enhances water storage (e.g. compost, animal manures or green manures). • Enhance nutrient efficiency through crop rotations or intercropping with nitrogen-fixing crops and judicious/ precision use of inorganic fertilizer to reduce losses. • Minimize GHGs emissions (reduced traffic and tillage and efficient use of organic and inorganic fertilizers). • The timely provision of micronutrients in “fortified” fertilizers is a potential source of enhanced crop nutrition where deficiencies occur (FAO, 2011a). • Leguminous species can fix nitrogen (N) through symbiotic Rhizobium, however, they have a lower C/N ratio than cereals and grasses and breakdown fast, providing little cover to protect soils from erosion.

Nitrous oxide emissions are significantly related to use of organic and inorganic N fertilizer and legume-derived N.

Nitrate leaching from overuse of mineral fertilizers also increases the potential for off-site nitrous oxide emissions.

Options to reduce N losses and emissions include: • change the N fertilizer source from ammonium-based to urea, or switching to slow-release fertilizers; • placement of fertilizer N near the zone of active root uptake; • synchronise timing of N fertilizer application with plant N demand to reduce N losses; • improve manure application rates, applying solid rather than liquid manure, and to dry rather than wet areas when air temperatures are low; • use nitrification inhibitors.