--- Source: MEA, 2005 ---

48
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Service
Sub-category
Status
Notes
Genetic resources
lost through extinction and crop genetic resource loss
Biochemicals, natural,
medicines, pharmaceuticals
lost through extinction, overharvest
Fresh water
unsustainable use for drinking, industry, and irrigation;
amount of hydro energy unchanged, but dams
increase ability to use that energy
Regulating Services
Air quality regulation
decline in ability of atmosphere to cleanse itself
Climate regulation
global
net source of carbon sequestration since mid-century
regional and local
preponderance of negative impacts
Water regulation
+/–
varies depending on ecosystem change and location
Erosion regulation
increased soil degradation
Water purification
and waste treatment
declining water quality
Disease regulation
+/–
varies depending on ecosystem change
Pest regulation
natural control degraded through pesticide use
Pollination

a
apparent global decline in abundance of pollinators
Natural hazard regulation
loss of natural buffers (wetlands, mangroves)
Cultural Services
Spiritual and religious
values
rapid decline in sacred groves and species
Aesthetic values
decline in quantity and quality of natural lands
Recreation and ecotourism
+/–
more areas accessible but many degraded
Note: For provisioning services, we define enhancement to mean increased production of the service through changes in area over which
the service is provided (e.g., spread of agriculture) or increased production per unit area. We judge the production to be degraded if
the current use exceeds sustainable levels. For regulating and supporting services, enhancement refers to a change in the service
that leads to greater benefits for people (e.g., the service of disease regulation could be improved by eradication of a vector known to
transmit a disease to people). Degradation of regulating and supporting services means a reduction in the benefits obtained from the
service, either through a change in the service (e.g., mangrove loss reducing the storm protection benefits of an ecosystem) or through
human pressures on the service exceeding its limits (e.g., excessive pollution exceeding the capability of ecosystems to maintain water
quality). For cultural services, enhancement refers to a change in the ecosystem features that increase the cultural (recreational,
aesthetic, spiritual, etc.) benefits provided by the ecosystem.
a Indicates low to medium certainty. All other trends are medium to high certainty.

Source: MEA, 2005
Resilient systems
Greater frequency of extreme events, increased temperatures, changes in rainfall patterns and greater in-
tensity of rainfalls that are expected to result from climate change will increase uncertainty and risk in agri-
cultural production. Long-term changes in temperature will slowly lead to fundamental changes in the plant
and animal species that can be used for agriculture in a particular location. The emergence of new pests and
diseases as well as new trading patterns are likely. To cope with these changes, land users need to be flexible
and develop a learning attitude. The diversification of production and the management of natural resources at
the landscape level provides this flexibility and facilitates risk management.
Improving productivity and livelihoods in a sustainable way can only be achieved by safeguarding the productiv-
ity of the natural resource base on which these livelihoods and production systems depend. For this reason, the