--- Mussel farming in Galicia and in Southern Chile ---

276 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case study 10.3 Mussel farming: a food system with minimal GHG emissions Cultured filter feeders (e.g. bivalves, such as mussels and oysters, and some echinoderms, such as sea cucumbers) and algae do not need external feeds. They can live on carbon and other nutrients in the environment. Mussel farming can be done with no or minimal GHG emissions and low or minimum environmental impacts. The impacts of mussel farming are most often related to the production of feces or pseudofeces, which when they accumulate in sediments can cause Hypoxia (lack of oxygen). However, well planned, well situated and appropriately sized shellfish culture seems to have little effect on the community of organisms which live on, in, or near the seabed (benthos), even when large areas are occupied.

On the other hand, the benefits of biological absorption of nutrients for control of eutrophication5 symptoms have been documented in many parts of the world. It is clear that the existence of significant filter feeder aquaculture (e.g. in China) has been instrumental in controlling coastal eutrophication, probably on a national scale (Ferreira et al., 2013).

In countries such as China, mussel farming provides an important source of food and protein and supports associate livelihoods. In countries with lower seafood consumption, such as Chile, mussel farming provides jobs and livelihoods and a large proportion of the production is exported. In general, the ecosystem services of extracting nutrients and reducing eutrophication risks in the water column have not been properly evaluated. However, Bunting and Pretty (2007) build the case for the culture of mussels (Mytilus edulis) on rafts in Killary Harbour, Ireland, (as described by Rodhouse and Roden, 1987). They estimate that 10.8 tonnes of carbon per year would be assimilated6 in mussel production and that the removal rate of carbon during harvest was 0.008 tonnes of carbon m-2 per year 1, which is equivalent to 80 tonnes of carbon per ha per year.

The great majority of mussel farming is carried out in floating or underwater holding systems that facilitate the mussels’ permanent filtration of phytoplankton from the water. These systems use two types of techniques: suspended lines from a floating tray or individual long lines tied to a weight on the bottom; and a floating system on the surface. Mussel seeds attach to these lines and individuals grow by feeding on the available phytoplankton. Most bivalve farming can be carbon- friendly and is comparatively energy efficient. However, these farming systems are sensitive to several threats related to climate variability and climate change. The most common climate-related threats include changes in water quality (e.g. temperature and salinity) and increased frequency and prevalence of red tides.

Mussel farming in Galicia and in Southern Chile Mytilus galloprovincialis is the main species of mussel farmed in the Galicia Rias in Spain. Mussel growth is very fast.

Normally is takes about 18 months for mussels to reach commercial size, but in many cases, mussels can grow to commercial size in one year. The Ria Arousa is the most productive area for mussel farming. It benefits from an upwelling system, that regularly contributes cold water and nutrients, which causes exceptional phytoplankton production that can sustain more than 2 000 floating rafts. The rafts or floating platforms are a rectangular wood frame of about 500 m2.

Usually one raft is one farm and is owned by a single family. Estimated annual yield for the Ria Arousa is about 60 tonnes per ha without shell. The annual estimated production for Galicia is around 250 000 tonnes (with shell). Current preliminary estimates of employment indicate that about 10 000 people live directly or indirectly from the mussel farming in Galicia.

In Chile, the most common farmed species is Mytilus chilensis. Farms can be of different size and operate at different scales of production. The farming is done using long lines. A ‘mother line’ normally about 100 m in length is held by floats and tied to the bottom. Many vertical lines hang from the mother line. Farming density can range from 10 to 12 long lines per ha in protected bays, channels or fjords in a water column that can reach from 10 to 40 m in depth. Estimated yield ranges from 60 and 70 tonnes per ha without shell. In 2011, Chile produced 221 000 tonnes of mussels. Although there is no current available quantitative information, it is claimed that mussel farming activities generate significant local direct and indirect employment not only through farming but also in the processing, an economic activity that employs mostly women. 5 A condition of excessive algae production due to excessive nutrient availability, which usually leads to a situation of hypoxia and losses of biodiversity. 6 Mussels feed on particles and assimilate carbon.