--- Page 157 ---

144 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Figure 5.2 Indicative shares of final energy consumption for the food sector for high- and low- GDP countries 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% ~50 EJ/year High-GDP countries ~95 EJ/year Global ~45 EJ/year Retail, preparation and cooking Processing and distribution Fisheries production Livestock production Cropping production Low-GDP countries On the input side, the linkages between energy and agrifood systems have strengthened as agriculture has become increasingly reliant on chemical fertilizers, irrigation and machinery. Post-harvest activities, such as food storage, processing and distribution, are also energy-intensive. Consequently, higher and volatile energy costs have a direct impact on agricultural production costs and food prices. Over the last decades, the in- creased use of energy by the agricultural sector has significantly contributed to feeding the world. Energy from fossil fuels has increased farm mechanization, boosted fertilizer production and improved food processing and transportation. Between 1900 (when energy inputs were limited to low-level fertilization and rudimentary mechanization) and 2000, the world’s cultivated area doubled, but the energy used in edible crops expanded six-fold. This greater productivity was made possible by an 85-fold increase in energy input per hectare (Smil, 2008). This transformation occurred in an area of cheap oil and where there were few concerns about climate change. However, since then times have changed.

Prices for nitrogen fertilizers and other fossil fuel-dependent inputs are closely related to the price of crude oil. Rising and volatile oil prices translate into higher and fluctuating food production costs. Farmers, in partic- ular smallholder farmers, are the first to be affected. As a result, agrifood systems that are highly dependent upon fossil fuels pose serious challenges to development, and this could hamper food security in the future.

Food losses occur at all stages of the supply chain. About one-third of food produced is lost or wasted (Gustavs- son et al., 2011). The energy embedded in global annual food losses is thought to be around 38 percent of the total final energy consumed by the whole food chain (FAO, 2011 a and b).

As stated earlier, one of the greatest challenges the world now faces is to develop global food systems that can emit fewer GHG emissions, benefit from a secure energy supply, are be resilient to fluctuating energy prices, and continue to ensure food security and foster sustainable development. This calls for energy-smart food systems that: