--- Page 474 ---

461 MODULE 16: Making CSA work for the most vulnerable: the role of safety nets Targeting: reaching the “most vulnerable” versus community-wide action Effective targeting is key for maximizing efficiency and program impact. Using safety nets as targeting platforms for introducing specific CSA-related activities can be a practical measure to help make sure that CSA benefits the poorest and most vulnerable. On the other hand, in some low-income contexts where massive poverty still prevails, it becomes challenging to strike a balance between ensuring benefits reach the most vulnerable popu- lations, and avoiding artificial boundaries between and within almost equally-vulnerable communities.

In practical terms, for example, CSA approaches must be implemented holistically and through broad partici- patory approaches when aimed at enhancing the resilience of entire watersheds or landscapes where differ- ent communities reside, some poorer than others. In fact, this is the same philosophy that guides much of the transformative landscape interventions implemented through safety nets in poor and vulnerable areas, whereby the achievement of collective and communal benefits impose more participatory approaches.

As not all households that share the same land-use unit have the same labour profile and wealth, resource transfers can help enable the poorest households within this unit to work to conserve the land. One study on the impact of food-for-programmes has concluded that the farmers would not have collectively constructed the large-scale improvements without food as an incentive (Reij et al., 2005). At the same time, concomitant self- help contributions of the better off community members are necessary to ensure the involvement of the entire community and achieve the required coverage and scale.

In this regard, participatory planning procedures that recognize both people and ecosystems’ requirements are critical to identify viable projects, enhance participation of food insecure households—women headed households in particular— and ensure the involvement of the community across different levels of wealth. This is also critical for ownership and sustainability of interventions that include resource transfers, as the next section highlights.

Community ownership and sustainability When applied in situations of top-down approaches, limited or insufficient technical standards and support, tenure insecurity and a missing legal framework, incentives in the form of resource transfers are not only inef- fective, but also potentially detrimental in terms of ownership building and sustainability.

A basic village or community-level participatory planning approach improves people’s participation and in- creased sense of ownership over assets created or rehabilitated, with a positive impact on management and sustainability. Community level decision-making and targeting may be strengthened, particularly if the most vulnerable (including the young and women), are involved in project selection, design and implementation. The approach can also help identify and promote self-help efforts within the community on needs outside of the intervention scope.

The need for context-specific approaches Depending on the specific context, safety nets and resource transfers can contribute to resilience, adaptation and other aspects of CSA to various degrees. In low capacity contexts, (e.g. where there is weak governance, instability and conflict) interventions that require significant expertise that is not realistically available should be avoided. Instead, low-tech and low-risk interventions are usually more appropriate. Such interventions do not mean low quality work, but involve less technical inputs and are more in line with specific time commit- ments that participants can contribute. Examples include drainage and irrigation canals clearing, dike estab- lishment or community emergency preparedness training.

In higher capacity contexts, more sophisticated and integrated approaches can be considered. Sustainable land management, for example, integrates ecological and social approaches through a set of land manage- ment principles and interventions encompassing community-based approaches within defined landscape units. Similarly, community-based participatory watershed planning brings people and their livelihoods to- gether with the natural environment by focusing on water catchments as the centre of planning of activities.