--- Page 125 ---

112
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
• SOM is the organic fraction of the soil that is made up of dead plant and animal materials in various
stages of decomposition. It does not include fresh and undecomposed plant materials lying on the soil
surface which is known as litter. SOM primarily contains organic carbon (on average 58 percent), but
also macro- and micronutrients essential for plant growth and some inorganic carbon. Soil organic
carbon (SOC) has an impact on the overall biological resilience of agro-ecosystems. It is also important
for the soil’s physical properties (e.g. aggregation, water holding capacity, water infiltration and aera-
tion) and chemical fertility (e.g. nutrient availability). SOC also acts as a sink for atmospheric carbon. In
addition, SOC enhances soil structure by binding the soil particles together as stable aggregates.
Part of the biomass that is returned to the soil through processes of decay is converted into carbon
compounds that stay in the soil for a long time (i.e. humus and related organo-mineral complexes). The
amount of this stable fraction of SOM varies depending on the quantity and quality of the biomass and
is higher in ecosystems with high biodiversity (Charman and Roper, 2000). The greater the SOM content,
the greater the soil biodiversity and its activity in breaking down dead and decaying organic matter into
humus and in making nutrients available for plant growth.
• Soil carbon stabilization. In most soils, young and unstable macro-aggregates are formed by biological
processes (e.g. growing roots, fungal, bacterial and faunal activity have a primary role in mixing fresh
organic matter with soil particles and root exudates [a complex of compounds secreted from growing
roots and root hairs]). Young macro-aggregates physically protect carbon and nitrogen from mineraliza-
tion by microbial enzymes, but need to be further stabilized for long-term carbon accumulation. In the
carbon stabilization process, micro-aggregates are first formed within the unstable macro-aggregates.
These macro-aggregates are then broken down further with the liberation of the micro-aggregates. The
processes for the stabilization of aggregates mainly involve biological factors (such as ageing4, as well
as the growth of roots that exert pressure, remove water and produce exudates that have a role both
as cementing agents and as substrate for further microbial activity). Some climate-dependent factors
(such as wet-dry cycles) are also part of stabilization processes. As mechanical soil disturbance (i.e.
ploughing) disrupts these important biological processes, it is particularly detrimental for the build up
of SOM.
• Soil nutrients and organisms. While decomposing SOM, the multitude of any organisms in the soil food
web release nitrogen (in the form of ammonia ions), potassium, calcium, magnesium and a range of
other nutrients necessary for plant growth. Many of these plant nutrients exist in the soil in the form of
positively charged ions (i.e. cations). The negative charges on the surfaces of clay particles and SOM at-
tract cations and thus provide a nutrient reserve available to plant roots. Only a small percentage of the
essential plant nutrients remains ‘loose’ in the soil water and directly available for plant uptake. Plants
obtain many of their nutrients from soil by ‘cation exchange’, whereby root hairs exchange hydrogen
ions with the cations adsorbed on the soil particles. Clay soils have a higher cation exchange capacity
and a structurally greater potential fertility than silty and sandy soils.
• Nitrogen is a nutrient that deserves special attention as it plays a key role in plant metabolism and
growth but it can also be a cause of pollution when it leaches in the form of nitrates into the water table.
Also, nitrogen can be released from the agro-ecosystem in form of nitrous oxide (N20) – a serious GHG
that affects global warming. The atmosphere contains 78 percent nitrogen by volume. But it is the lack
of this element that most often limits plant growth because plants cannot use gaseous nitrogen from
the atmosphere. However atmospheric nitrogen can be converted into nitrate and ammonium ions in the
soil through nitrogen fixation by certain soil micro-organisms (symbiotic Rhizobia bacteria associated
with the roots of legumes and non-symbiotic bacteria Clostridium and Azoterbacter, which are free-living
in the soil).

4 Ageing is the deposition of polysaccharides and other organic cementing agents by microbial activity.