--- Rural Resilience Initiative launched by WFP and Oxfam America (see Box 16.2 on R4 below). ---

458 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Safety nets can also serve as a platform for enhancing access to innovative risk management tools, such as weather-index based insurance.5 For example, “insurance for work” can be used not only to expand access to insurance, but can be added to existing labour-based safety nets to protect beneficiaries and reduce costs for governments and donors from the disruptions caused by climate disasters. This is the objective of the R4 Rural Resilience Initiative launched by WFP and Oxfam America (see Box 16.2 on R4 below).

Another area where safety nets can make a significant contribution is in fostering human and social capital, which set the stage for and maximize the impact of adaptation interventions (UN TT SDCC, 2011). Invest- ments in early childhood nutrition can spur economic growth, as these investments have long-term effects on cognitive skills and productivity.6 Safety nets can also provide a platform for introducing specific CSA- related activities – for example capacity development on skills and adaptation practices and technologies to be applied in homestead vegetable production or agro-forestry – and for targeting these activities towards the poorest and most vulnerable, who are often women. The Government of Bangladesh’s Vulnerable Group Development (VGD) programme, for example, provides monthly wheat flour rations and entrepreneurship training to the poorest, most marginalised women in Bangladesh. Roughly 10 million women and their fami- lies have benefited from the VGD programme since it was launched three decades ago. Participating women attend regular training sessions where they discuss social issues and learn about their rights. They also 5 See also Balzer and Hess, 2010. 6 For example, analysis by the Boston Consulting Group showed productivity gains of up to US$ 1 782 for every US$ 146 invested in Kenya’s school feeding programmes (WFP and Boston Consulting Group, 2009).

Box 16.2 R4 – Scaling up good practice through partnership and innovation In 2010, WFP and Oxfam America partnered to scale up an innovative approach to strengthen poor farmers’ resilience to climate-related shocks. The Rural Resilience Initiative (R4) combines improved resource management (risk reduction), insurance (risk transfer), microcredit (prudent risk taking), and savings (risk reserves). The initiative builds upon the Horn of Africa Risk Transfer for Adaptation (HARITA) programme, which was successfully implemented in Ethiopia’s Tigray region by Oxfam America with funding from the Rockefeller Foundation and Swiss Re.

R4 allows poor, food insecure households who already benefit from food-for-asset or public works schemes such as PSNP to pay for insurance with their labour. Through “insurance-for-work” poor farmers work on small-scale, community-identified public projects in return for insurance coverage. Farmers with more cash can also purchase this insurance outright.

The insurance reduces uncertainty from climate variability and allows the poorest and most vulnerable farmers to make investments that increase their productivity. In case of a drought, farmers receive automatic insurance pay- outs if rainfall drops below a predetermined threshold. With the insurance pay-out, the farmers do not have to sell off livestock, tools or other productive assets to survive and will be able to afford the seeds and inputs necessary to plant in the following season.

R4 is now targeting nearly 19 000 households in the Tigray region of Ethiopia. The initiative reached a major milestone in 2012 when more than 12 000 drought-affected households received an insurance pay-out of over US$ 320 000.

This is the first time that a weather index insurance programme in Ethiopia has delivered pay-outs at such a large scale directly to small farmers. In addition, farmers received the funds when they needed them the most, thanks to an early warning system based on advanced satellite technology that calculates when the crops begin to suffer and triggers the pay-outs.

The R4 Initiative demonstrated that safety nets can provide an effective and cost-efficient platform to make insurance accessible to the chronically poor. The initiative represents a new kind of partnership, bringing together public and private sector actors in a strategic large-scale initiative to innovate and develop better tools to help the most vulnerable people build resilient livelihoods. It also constitutes a first step towards developing a sustainable insurance market for poor people, an essential factor in ensuring farmers’ livelihoods and food security over the long term. In 2012, R4 began expanding to Senegal where it expects to reach 18 000 farmers by 2015. In 2013, R4 is further scaling up in Ethiopia and is expected to be piloted to two additional countries by 2015.

Source: WFP and OXFAM AMERICA, 2012