--- This Module was written by Jean-Marc Faurès (FAO) with contributions from Devin Bartley (FAO), Mohamed ---

97 MODULE 3: Water management effective options for mitigating CH4 emissions from rice fields. Currently, true aerobic rice yields tend to be poor (less than 2 tonnes per hectare), and this is a strong disincentive for adoption even when natural drain- age conditions are favourable (Comprehensive Assessment, 2007). Promoted in many rice-producing coun- tries, the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) is a practice that aims to increase the productivity of irrigated rice by changing the management of plants, soil, water and nutrients. Because SRI reduces the amount of flooding of irrigated rice, it is also likely to reduce CH4 emissions. It also saves water and may possibly reduce nitrous oxide emissions (HLPE, 2012). However, well-quantified data on reductions in CH4 emission are not yet available.

In inland fisheries and aquaculture, riparian habitat restoration or creation can be promoted to absorb carbon and create suitable environments for capture fish production. The modernization of fishing and aquaculture facilities also has the potential to contribute towards low impact fuel efficient (LIFE) systems (see Module 10 on fisheries and aquaculture).

Irrigated pastures are important in some areas of the world, and their importance is growing as demand for animal feed increases. Better pasture management, combined with the use of feed additives that suppress CH4 fermentation in ruminants, can reduce livestock CH4 emissions substantially (Turral et al., 2011). 3.10 Conclusions Most of the impacts of climate change agriculture and rural livelihoods are expected to result from changes in the water cycle. Rainfall variability and the subsequent increase in frequency of extreme weather events, including droughts and floods, combined with an increasing acceleration of the water cycle through increased evapotranspiration, will have an impact on every element in agricultural ecosystems: crops, livestock, trees, fish, rural communities and physical infrastructure. For this reason, climate change adaptation strategies for agriculture will need to be viewed though a ‘water lens’.

Many of the development activities for improving the socio-economic conditions in rural areas will have a positive impact on climate change adaptation as they reduce the vulnerability of local communities to shocks and increase their resilience. However, new programmes must become more strategic. The resilience of these populations to climate change must be assessed systematically to avoid maladaptation and increase the robustness of development programmes. In addition, specific climate change adaptation actions will need to be designed and mainstreamed into development programmes.

Given that most intensive agricultural practices with potential for climate change mitigation use some form of irrigation, there is some scope for mitigation actions addressing how water is managed in agriculture.

Notes This Module was written by Jean-Marc Faurès (FAO) with contributions from Devin Bartley (FAO), Mohamed Bazza (FAO), Jacob Burke (previously FAO, now World Bank), Jippe Hoogeveen (FAO), Doris Soto (FAO) and Pasquale Steduto (FAO).