--- Page 515 ---

502 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK The bottom-up approach, on the other hand, takes the present as the point of departure and focuses on so- cio-economic dimensions of vulnerability as a basis for considering future vulnerability. The emphasis is on community-based participatory assessment, rather than on the numerical models often used in top-down ap- proaches. The vulnerability and adaptation needs of communities are put into context with reference to local non-climatic factors. Vulnerability is considered to be influenced by changing biophysical, social, economic, political, institutional and technological structures and processes. In the contextual approach, the vulnerabil- ity of social-ecological systems is determined by multiple factors and processes. The concept of contextual vulnerability provides a more holistic view in which the climate projections are only one part of the assess- ment of threats to social and environmental resources (Figure 18.3). The associated uncertainties will be more complex.

Figure 18.3 Contextual vulnerability Political and institutional structures and changes Climate variability and change Economic and social structures and changes Contextual vulnerability Institutional Biophysical Contextual conditions Socio-economic Institutional Responses Source: adapted from O’Brien et al., 2007 ‘Resilience’ is the ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner (IPCC, 2012). Adaptive capacity in the resilience framework is the capacity of people in a given system to influence resilience. A system may be made more resilient in a number of ways, including: managing human and environmental components of a system in a manner that maintains the system’s status quo (e.g. managing water resources to better cope with drought); or transforming into a new system when the current system becomes untenable (e.g. eliminating irrigation and agricultural production if drought risk is too extreme) (Engle, 2011; Walker et al., 2004; Walker et al., 2006; Folke, 2006; resilience is also discussed in Module 1).

Traditionally, vulnerability and resilience frameworks are different in some key aspects (adapted from Engle, 2011). The vulnerability approach tends to: • be oriented towards research on hazards and risks; • be centred on people and more translatable to application and policy outcomes; • conduct assessments for single spatial scale and ‘snapshots’ in time; • be less focused on ecological and environmental aspects; and,