--- Page 561 ---

549 Glossary Conditional cash transfers: Conditional cash transfers seek to break the cycle of poverty by developing hu- man capital. Cash is provided upon the recipient’s fulfilment of specific criteria, including enrolling children in school, regularly visiting the doctor, or receiving vaccinations.

Conservation agriculture (CA): Conservation Agriculture is an approach to managing agro-ecosystems for improved and sustained productivity, increased profits and food security while preserving and enhancing the resource base and the environment. It is characterized by three linked principles, namely, continuous mini- mum mechanical soil disturbance; permanent organic soil cover; and diversification of crop species grown in sequences and/or associations.

Controlled traffic: Restriction of all heavy wheel traffic to permanent traffic lanes.

Coping capacity: The ability of people, organizations and systems, using available skills and resources, to face and manage adverse conditions, emergencies or disasters.

Crop diversification: Species diversification through varied crop associations and/or rotations (involving an- nual and/or perennial crops including trees).

Cross breeding: Crossbreeding refers to the process of breeding an animal or plant with purebred parents of two different breeds, often with the intention to create offspring or seedlings that share the traits of both par- ent lineages, or producing an animal or plant with hybrid vigor.

Deficit irrigation: An irrigation practice whereby water supply is reduced below maximum levels and mild stress is allowed with minimal effects on yield.

Deforestation: The conversion of forest to another land use or the long-term reduction of tree canopy cover below the 10 percent threshold.

Disaster: A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society involving widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses and impacts, which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources.

Disaster risk reduction (DRR): The concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic ef- forts to analyse and manage the causal factors of disasters, including through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and property, wise management of land and the environment and improved preparedness for adverse events.

Disaster risk management (DRM): The systematic process of using administrative directives, organizations, and operational skills and capacities to implement strategies, policies and improved coping capacities in order to lessen the adverse impacts of hazards and the possibility of disaster.

Drought: The phenomenon that exists when precipitation is significantly below normal recorded levels, caus- ing serious hydrological imbalances that often adversely affect land resources and production systems.

Drylands: Areas characterized by lack of water, which constrains their two major interlinked services of pri- mary production and nutrient cycling.

Dry spell: Short period of water stress during critical crop growth stages and which can occur with high fre- quency but with minor impacts compared with droughts.