--- This module was written by Damiano Luchetti, Ehsan Dulloo, Anna Asfaw and Linda Collette (FAO) with con- ---

185 MODULE 6: Conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture Many plant and animal species found in wild ecosystems are valuable for food and agriculture, or play an important cultural role in local societies. They can provide a safety net when food is scarce. Moreover, they are increasingly being marketed locally and internationally, which provides an important contribution to lo- cal household incomes. Integrating in situ and ex situ conservation techniques is an effective strategy for the conservation of wild relatives and species harvested from the wild. While in situ conservation is generally the strategy of choice for these species, this should be backed up by ex situ programmes, which can greatly facili- tate their use. 6.3 Concluding remarks The genetic diversity of living species is a precious and irreplaceable resource that humankind needs to contin- ue valuing, conserving and using. Genetic resources for food and agriculture safeguard agricultural production and provide options for coping with climate change (e.g. seeds with higher yields, better quality, earlier ma- turity, better adaptation and higher resistance to diseases, insects, and environmental stress). Domesticated species, breeds and varieties and their wild relatives will be the main source of genetic resources for adapta- tion to climate change. In situ and ex situ conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture and their wild relatives will be critical for the development of climate-smart agriculture. With the interdependence of countries increasing, the transfer of genetic resources and the knowledge related to their use needs to be supported through effective cooperation between countries. The fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources also needs to be properly addressed.

Notes This module was written by Damiano Luchetti, Ehsan Dulloo, Anna Asfaw and Linda Collette (FAO) with con- tributions by Devin Bartley, Cassandra De Young, Mary Jane Dela Cruz, Matthias Halwart, Kathrin Hett, Irene Hoffmann, Mario Marino, Albert Nikiema, Dafydd Pilling, Beate Scherf, Doris Soto, Kim-Anh Tempelman and Álvaro Toledo (FAO) in coordination with the Secretariat of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and FAO’s inter-departmental working group on biodiversity.