--- MODULE 12: Local institutions ---

325 MODULE 12: Local institutions 12.1 Introduction Definition Many people equate the term ‘institutions’ with ‘organizations’. In reality, institutions signify something broad- er than organizations. They essentially define the ‘rules of the game’; the way things are and can be done, as defined by accepted norms, roles and values. Institutions include both formal organizations and contracts as well as informal social and cultural norms and conventions that operate within and between organizations (North, 1990; Ostrom, 2005). Section 12.2 describes different types of institutions and provides some examples.

Why is paying attention to institutions so crucial to CSA?

CSA requires changes in farming households’ behaviour and strategies, as well as changes in the usual tim- ing of agricultural practices. Without appropriate institutional structures in place, the innovations required to implement CSA may seem overwhelming to smallholder farmers. Successfully managing change demands accurate and up-to-date information, a degree of financial capacity and, if the changes are to be far-reaching, the ability to cooperate with others on a broad scale (see Box 12.1 for details for a successful CSA initiative).

Some of the changes CSA requires include:

Adapting management approaches As populations expand, competition for natural resources will increase. In addition, environmental and cli- matic factors threaten to degrade these resources. For this reason, CSA centres on finding new methods for managing soil, water and land. Water tables are dropping considerably in many places (e.g. in parts of India).

Water harvesting and water storage techniques need to be able to deal with the likelihood of increasing rainfall variability. Land degradation and declining soil fertility are widespread problems. The uptake of new strategies and approaches are required to improve soil quality (structure, fertility, water regulation) and restore degraded lands.

Climate-smart crop varieties As climate change alters rainfall patterns, one CSA approach for adapting to new conditions is to switch crops (e.g. planting sorghum instead of maize if rainfall decreases or vice versa if it increases). The move to new crops may involve planting varieties that have a shorter growing cycle, can better tolerate saline soils and ex- treme weather events (e.g. droughts and floods), and have greater resistance to pest and diseases.

Changing farming schedules Climate change is forcing farmers to change the schedule of their customary farming activities. In East Africa, for example, many farmers have already begun to plant earlier than they have traditionally done because of shifting rainfall patterns (Kristjanson et al., 2012) Mitigating while adapting to climate change As the need to mitigate carbon emissions grows, planting trees on farms and improving the management of livestock and rangelands will also be crucial CSA activities (FAO, 2010). Farmers usually adopt these actions primarily because they help enhance and diversify incomes, not because they lower emissions. Climate change mitigation is an added benefit.