--- Page 62 ---

49 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems foundation of CSA is resilient livelihoods and ecosystems. Resilience is the capacity to adapt to changes and disturbances and, at the same time, maintain core functions. Key strategies for ensuring that agriculture can adapt to change include: sustainable soil and water management practices; the active promotion of biodiver- sity; and the diversification of income sources inside and outside the farms.

Climate change will have an impact, be it positive or negative, on all production systems. Every system will have to adapt. This can happen spontaneously by adjusting to the changes as they come or in a planned man- ner in which the potential impacts are assessed and actions are taken to improve short- and long-term re- silience. Adapatation efforts must build the capacity to cope with increasingly difficult conditions and gradual changes in climate (FAO, 2011b).

Management approaches should aim to keep the system in a state that will allow it to continue delivering val- ued ecosystem goods and services, or if necessary to move towards more resilient, productive systems. Both risk management and change management form an integral part of these approaches. Disaster risk manage- ment focuses on preventing, mitigating, preparing for and responding to shocks in short- and medium-time scales. Change management adds a strategic, long-term objective to policy, legal and research frameworks (FAO, 2011b). Fisher et al. (2006) outline ten guiding principles for protecting biodiversity, ecosystem function- ing and resilience in commodity production landscapes (see Box 2.2).

Water management and the efficient use of available water will be of fundamental importance in building resilient production systems and improving the management of climate change-induced risks (see also Mod- ule 3 on water management). The efficient and equitable management of water catchments is generally only possible when done in a landscape context and combined with farm-level water management practices.

Water management requires common agreements on the modalities of use. These agreements will be best achieved through participatory governance processes related to integrated land-use planning. Large catch- ments, such as river basins, need layers of nested planning approaches, starting at the river basin scale, with implementation activities planned in detail on the landscape scale.

Maintaining high levels of genetic diversity is fundamental to decrease risk, ensure multiple needs are met and maintain stability. This is why many small-scale farmers continue growing traditional crop varieties even if improved varieties are available (Frison et al., 2011). It is also widely recognized that maintaining crop diver- sity in production systems is crucial to avoid vulnerability and widespread crop loss resulting from particular biotic or abiotic threats (Wolfe, 2000). Likewise, the diversity of livestock and soil micro-organisms will improve the resilience of the farming systems. Promoting genetic diversity and diverse production strategies for risk management, including climate risks, is a crucial component of promoting CSA (see Module 6 on genetic resources). Equally important is the biodiversity in the production system and in the landscape. This is also critical, for example, for pollination services (see Box 2.3).

Box 2.2 Ten guiding principles for protecting biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and resilience in commodity production landscapes.

Principles for protecting biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and resilience in commodity production landscapes include: pattern-oriented management strategies, such as maintaining and creating large, structurally complex patches of native vegetation throughout the landscape; creating corridors, stepping stones and buffers around sensitive areas; and maintaining heterogeneity across environmental gradients. Process-oriented management strategies to target specific key species or environmental processes are recommended. Strategic activities include: maintaining key species’ interactions and functional diversity; understanding the impacts that particular disturbances have on ecosystems; controlling aggressive, over-abundant, and invasive species; minimizing specific threats, such as chemical pollution or hunting; and maintaining species of particular concern.

Source: Fisher et al., 2006