--- Since 2004, the Livestock and Environmental Management Programme at Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher ---

230 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case study 8.2 Developing climate-smart cattle ranch in the central region of Nicaragua Since 2004, the Livestock and Environmental Management Programme at Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher Education Centre (CATIE) has been implementing participatory training processes in Central America with cattle producers using the farmer field school philosophy. This process has promoted the adoption of silvopastoral systems and good practices to improve income, food security, ecosystem services and adaptation to and mitigation of climate change. Seven dual-purpose farms (milked cows with calf at foot) were selected for each of the following groups: with silvopastoral system and traditional system. The first group was predominantly fed with improved pasture with trees, cut and carry fodder banks of forage grass (Pennisetum purpureum) and woody fodder (Gliricidia sepium and Cratylia argentea). Compared with traditional farming systems, the silvopastoral system farms had higher milk production per cow during the year. Farmers also earned more income and more carbon was stored in the soil (Table 8.6). The impacts of silvopastoral system innovations are clearly visible. However, sustainable participatory training processes (learning by doing) and incentive mechanisms (soft credits, certification and green markets in value chains) are required to encourage the uptake of these innovative practices.

To meet the goals of CSA, farmers themselves must use their own assessments to develop design proposals that are based on silvopastoral system and good practices (e.g. efficient use and conservation of water, and manure management) and are suitable to the farm’s biophysical and socioeconomic conditions. The farmers using silvopastoral system have the potential to contribute to reaching CSA objectives (Table 8.7) and would improve ecosystem health.

Table 8.6 Productive, economic and environmental performance of silvopastoral and traditional cattle farms in the Central region of Nicaragua Indicator Cattle ranch with silvopastoral practices Traditional cattle ranch Milk production (kg/cow/day) Rainy season 7.4 4.7 Dry season 4.4 2.9 Rank of income (US$/hectare/year) 346.3 - 519.6 227.7 – 327.8 Carbon sequestration (tonne/hectare) 11.0 5.3 Source: Chuncho, 2010 Table 8.7 Response farms with silvopastoral and traditional systems to the CSA approach functions Variable Cattle ranch with silvopastoral practices Traditional cattle ranch Food security +3 +/- Productivity +4 +2 Livelihoods +4 +2 Adaptation and resilience +5 -1 Mitigation +5 -1 Water use +2 -1 Energy use +3 -1 External inputs +4 -2 Ranking -5 to +5