--- Page 510 ---

497 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation 18.1 Introduction This module provides an overview of methodologies, frameworks, and principles for assessment, monitoring and evaluation for CSA. The frameworks are intended to support: • assessments of the impact of a changing climate on agriculture, food security, and livelihoods; • assessments of the effectiveness of CSA interventions in enhancing adaptation, mitigation and food security; and • monitoring and evaluation in results-based planning processes for CSA.

These frameworks are intended to serve the needs of a variety of stakeholders, including vulnerable and food insecure communities, farmers, farmers’ organizations, district, regional and national offices of the Ministry of Agriculture (and other Ministries) and extension and rural service providers. The frameworks can also be used when designing and implementing national and subnational policies and programmes for agriculture, climate change and development.

This module provides guidance for translating the theories and practices of CSA into assessment, monitoring and evaluation activities. As the topics covered in CSA are very diverse and CSA practices are specific to loca- tion and context, it is not possible to prescribe one general approach for assessment, monitoring and evalu- ation. The ideas and methods outlined in this module represent a starting point for designing a more specific approach that is adequately focused, targets the needs and context of the proposed activity and takes into ac- count the guiding principles. This module does not address in detail institutional aspects, policies and capacity development related to assessment, monitoring and evaluation (e.g. stakeholder analysis, institutional analy- sis). These important issues are addressed in Modules 12, 13, and 17. Although they do not explicitly address planning processes, assessments and monitoring and evaluation are intimately linked to planning. Planning at the landscape scale is dealt with in more detail in Module 2.

The term ‘impact’ is used in two different ways in this module: • actual impact (i.e. historical, current) and potential impact (i.e. projected future) of climate change and climate variability on agriculture, livelihoods and food security; and • impact of CSA interventions, which are designed to address the issues of climate change and climate vari- ability (e.g. the reduction of greenhouse gas [GHG] emissions from agriculture), strengthen the agriculture sector and rural livelihoods, and contribute to food security.

The word ‘assessment’ is often used together with ‘impact’ (e.g. impact assessment, assessment of impact).

In this module, the word indicates an assessment of impacts of climate on agriculture, livelihood and food security. The words ‘evaluation’ and ‘indicator’ are used in the context of project and programme implementa- tion (e.g. evaluation of the impact of CSA measures, indicators for monitoring and evaluation). Throughout the module it is clearly indicated in which context these technical terms are used. 18.2 Defining assessment, monitoring and evaluation for CSA: scope, purposes, frameworks and concepts Assessments are closely related with monitoring and evaluation activities. Both are integral parts of CSA pro- ject cycles and are key to providing inputs and guidance to broader policies and programmes. Figure 18.1 shows where assessment, monitoring and evaluation activities occur through the policy and programme cycle in relation to the five steps of the planning process: conceptualization, preparation, appraisal and approval, implementation, and evaluation. The latter three steps form a project cycle in a narrow sense. The cycle is embedded in policies and programmes through assessment, monitoring and evaluation activities.