--- Page 105 ---

92 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Coping with water scarcity In many river basins, water scarcity is already the main challenge facing agriculture. In areas where water is scarce, climate change is expected to exacerbate tensions and increase competition for water. If agriculture is to continue meeting the demand for food and other commodities, efforts will be needed both on the supply side and on the demand side. Enhancing supply includes: increased access to and improved management of conventional water resources; habitat rehabilitation; dam operations; re-use of drainage water and waste- water; transfer of water between river basins; desalination; and pollution control. Demand management is defined as a set of actions that control water demand, either by raising the overall economic efficiency of its use as a natural resource, or operating intra- and intersectoral reallocation of water resources. Options to cope with water scarcity in agriculture can be seen as running a spectrum from the source of water to the end user (the farmer and fisher), and beyond, to the consumer of agricultural goods (FAO, 2012 ). A combination of technical, managerial, legal and investment options are needed to help farmers produce more with less water. These options need to be backed with a policy and incentive framework that alerts farmers to water scarcity and rewards more productive use of water at the farm level.

Increasing the reliability and flexibility of access to water for farmers is of prime importance. Many wasteful behaviours on farms are linked to the uncertainty associated with water distribution practices that do not allow farmers to optimize water application or raise the productivity of their crops. Water storage, and the combined use of groundwater and canal irrigation water, can go a long way towards improving the produc- tivity of water used for irrigation. Economic incentives, in particular the use of subsidies for pumping, must be designed in a way that promotes the efficient use of water and avoids wastage of both energy and water resources.

Building resilience From a livelihood perspective, building resilience involves reducing farmers’ exposure or sensitivity to shocks, or increasing their capacity to respond. Of prime importance is the ability to increase the farm- ing systems’ buffering capacity in the face of more variable supplies of rainwater. This necessitates an in- creased capacity to store water in the soil, in surface reservoirs or in underground reservoirs. Any action that increases the capacity to access water when needed will increase resilience to climate variability. These actions include: on-farm water harvesting; the enhancement the soil’s capacity to hold moisture (see also Module 4 on soils); on-farm water retention and enhanced infiltration; and, where possible, more system- atic access to groundwater. Supplementary irrigation at critical periods of the cropping season can reduce losses and boost productivity.

Resilience is closely linked to improved access to land and water. The strengthening of land and water rights will have a positive impact on resilience as it will encourage farmers and other rural people to invest in their land and build the assets that are needed for increased productivity and diversification.

Box 3.2 A continuum of adaptation activities: from development to climate change- specific actions Adaptation activities that span the continuum from development to climate change can be organized in four categories. The first category includes activities that are fundamentally about fostering human development. These activities focus on reducing poverty and addressing factors that make people vulnerable to harm, regardless of the cause. The second category of activities focuses on building response capacity. Mostly of a capacity-building nature, these activities tend to involve institution-building and technological approaches adapted from development efforts. The third category involves activities to manage climate risk. Activities in this category focus specifically on hazards and impacts and follow the concept of climate risk management. The fourth category involves activities for confronting climate change. They focus almost exclusively on addressing climate change impacts. Activities in this category tend to target climate change-related risks that are beyond historic climate variability.

Source: McGray et al., 2007 in OECD, 2009.