--- Page 476 ---

463 MODULE 16: Making CSA work for the most vulnerable: the role of safety nets Lastly, care should be taken that resource transfer, including insurance, does not discourage or impede au- tonomous actions adaptation by households. Providing transfers that shift risks to more aggregate levels could cause farmers to be less inclined to change their production techniques and livelihood strategies (FAO, 2011).

This can be avoided by “rewarding” change in production techniques, such as sustainable management of natural resource. In the case of the R4 Resilience Initiative already outlined in Box 16.2, for example, poor farmers can obtain insurance if they fulfil certain work norms as part of the PSNP, which are aimed at enhanc- ing resilience and reducing disaster risk. 16.5 Conclusions Growing climate-related risks result in greater needs for effective social protection systems and services shielding the most vulnerable from shocks and stresses. The poorest and most food insecure households and communities face significant barriers to adopting more resilient and productive livelihood strategies that would allow them to enhance their food and nutrition security in the face of climate change. Specific policies and interventions need to be deployed to ensure that these challenges are turned into opportunities for the most vulnerable.

This module addressed how safety nets can support the transition to CSA in the context of vulnerability and food insecurity. Focusing on the adaptation, resilience and productivity elements of CSA, the module argued that, if properly designed, resource transfers provided through safety nets can protects lives, livelihoods and potential gains in development as well as CSA from climate-related risks. In addition, it was outlined how safety nets can enable poor and food insecure people and communities to invest in productivity, adaptation and resilience building measures.

There is growing recognition of the role of safety nets in enhancing adaptive capacity and building resilience to climate change. Safety nets are emerging as a platform for breaking the cycle of recurrent emergencies, which are increasing in view of climate change. This is based on evidence that large shares of food insecure populations would need long-term assistance, independently of the occurrence of shocks. Some chronic needs are therefore ‘predictable’, and a corresponding predictable level of support is required to address these needs ex-ante, rather than with ex-post emergency assistance. Such a future oriented, anticipatory risk management approach offers important opportunities for cross-fertilizing social protection with adaptation and disaster risk reduction efforts (see also Module 15 on disaster risk reduction).

In addition, safety nets can allow for the acquisition of human capital, the skills and assets that poor farmers need to sustainably escape food insecurity and poverty and become resilient in the long run. A key function of safety nets in this regard is the rehabilitation and creation of livelihood assets, as was demonstrated within the various boxes. Exploiting this potential of resource transfers, however, requires a long-term, forward looking and preventive approach that focuses on strengthening the asset base of vulnerable households. The notion of a threshold, below which households have so few assets that they are forced to adopt negative risk-manage- ment and coping strategies, offers a floor level above which pro-poor adaptation measures should seek to lift households (Prowse and Scott, 2008).

The effective use of safety nets as enablers of resilient and sustainable development also requires a shift to- wards integrated approaches that link resource transfers with resilience building and productivity enhancing agricultural interventions. This calls for a move away from viewing safety nets as being triggered in response to agricultural failure, towards recognizing the positive linkages between agricultural interventions and social protection (Devereux and Guenthe, 2009). In the context of CSA, this implies that safety nets can and should be used more systematically to enhance productivity, resilience and adaptive capacity, and should become an integral part of developing pro-poor CSA strategies.