--- Mainstreaming CSA into Nation- ---

Module 13:

Mainstreaming CSA into Nation- al Policies and Programmes Overview Greater coherence, coordination and integration between various sectors dealing with climate change, agricultural development and food security is a key requirement for creating an enabling policy envi- ronment to promote the transformation to climate-smart agriculture (CSA). CSA policies and support measures need to be mainstreamed into broader public policy, expenditure and planning frameworks at the national, subnational and local level. Coordination is also necessary between concerned agencies across sectors at the national and local level. Policy priority needs to be given to CSA practices that bring productivity gains, enhance resilience and reduce emissions.

The first part of this module describes CSA within larger economic and policy frameworks and stresses its key role as a major driver of green economy. The second part examines ways to improve market acces- sibility through appropriate policy and financial instruments. It then looks at cross-sectoral coordination and the integration of CSA with disaster risk management and social safety net programmes. The last section highlights the role of implementing actors and how to improve their access to knowledge and monitoring.

Key messages • CSA needs to be mainstreamed into core government policies and programmes, including policy, expenditure and planning frameworks. Priority needs to be given to CSA practices that bring produc- tivity gains, enhance resilience and reduce emissions. • CSA and CSA policies must contribute to broader economic growth, poverty reduction and sustainable development goals. They should also provide an enabling environment for the adoption of CSA by the private and public sectors. • CSA requires coordination, between concerned agencies across different sectors at central and local levels. Partnerships with non-state stakeholders play a key role in CSA. A wider landscape approach is needed for the better management of agricultural production and ecosystem services. • An integrated approach to providing incentives for CSA, such as payments for environmental services, is needed. Public support that focus on research, the development of human capital, the sustainable management of soil and land, social protection and safety nets, and the development of technology and value chains are conducive to CSA adoption. • Secure land rights provide the enabling environment for investments in sustainable land and water management, which are key elements of CSA. • The successful design and implementation of CSA approaches require integration with disaster risk management strategies and actions, and social safety net programmes.