--- Page 170 ---

157 MODULE 5: Sound Management of Energy for CSA Technologies for energy-smart food and CSA A mix of appropriate energy technologies, equipment and facilities in farming communities is necessary to make the gradual shift to energy-smart food systems. The nature of this mix will depend on natural conditions, infrastructure and skills available in the labour force. There are many technologies that can be part of ener- gy-smart food systems, including: wind mills, solar collectors, photovoltaic panels, biogas production units, power generators, equipment for bio-oil extraction and purification, fermentation and distillation facilities for ethanol production, pyrolysis units, hydrothermal conversion equipment, solar-, wind or bioenergy-operated water pumps, renewable energy-powered vehicles, monitoring systems, information and communication tech- nologies (ICT), cooking stoves, equipment for water supply, distribution and purification. These technologies add value to production near the source of raw materials. They can also be combined on the same farm in integrated food-energy systems as shown in Figure 5.7.

Figure 5.7 An integrated approach to renewable energy for farming systems Biomass Wind Sun Crop residues and manure Biogas plants and storage Windmills Control equipment Stirling motor CHP station Meters Heat accumulator Heat for housing or productive uses Electricity to the grid or off-grid installations PV panels Solar collectors G G G Power Heat Generator G It is difficult to identify energy-smart food ‘hot-spots’ and intervention priorities with data that is currently available. Different food chains are subject to very different processes and require different types of energy inputs. In particular, more research is required on the relationships between energy use, yields and production costs in various agricultural systems and settings.

Field efficiencies5 can be up to 90 percent in tilling and cultivating; 65-70 percent in fertilizing and grain harvest- ing. However, results depend on yields and plot size. Fuel consumption is typically 600-1 200 megajoules per hectare (MJ/ha) for mouldboard ploughing; 200-4 900 MJ/ha for disking; 80-160 MJ/ha for planting; 150-300 MJ/ ha for ammonia application; 100-200 MJ/ha for cultivating; and 250-500 MJ/ha for grain harvesting (Smil, 2008).

Farming systems where there are typically low energy needs and extensive fields for farming and grazing, like those in Australia or New Zealand, can operate with energy requirement as low as two or three gigajoules per hectare (GJ/ha). The energy requirement for input-intensive agriculture in countries such as the Netherlands or Israel can reach up to 70-80 GJ/ha (Smil, 2008). 5 The work obtained from energy invested.