--- Source: FAO, 2013 ---

291
MODULE 11: Developing sustainable and inclusive food value chains for Climate-smart agriculture
Practices and technologies, many of which already exist, need to be not only profitable, but should also be
socially beneficial and reduce the impact on the environment in order to be sustainable. Sustainability that is
achieved across this triple bottom line can therefore also contribute to reaching the objectives of CSA as the
two approaches are complementary.
Trade-offs and synergies
In the sustainable and inclusive food value chain approach, sustainability is achieved in the overlapping area
indicated with ‘SFVCD’ of the three sustainability dimensions in Figure 11.2
Figure 11.2
The three sustainability dimensions in food value chain development
Economic
Impacts

Profits
Jobs/Incomes
Tax Revenues
Food supply
Eco-Social
Progress
Inclusive
Growth
Green
Growth
Social
Impacts
Added Value Distribution
Inclusiveness
Cultural Traditions
Nutrition & Health
Worker Safety
Animal welfare
Environmental
Impacts

Carbon footprint
Soil Conservation
Biodiversity
Food Waste & Losses
Toxicity
SFVCD
Source: FAO, 2013
Regarding these three dimensions there often are trade-offs, such as between achieving food security, poverty
alleviation and environmental objectives. For example, the transformation of food systems can cause unin-
tended environmental damage and environmental protection policies can have negative impacts on certain
societal groups like the poor. Another example is the introduction of a new technology, which can be environ-
mentally sustainable, but may not be commercially viable in the short run. Or, when consumers decide to buy
more local food instead of imported food, this may result in lower GHG emissions from transport and can result
in increased incomes of local producers, but may erode incomes of producers in developing countries.
Trade-offs exist when components of a system, such as the three sustainability dimensions, are competing with
or are exclusive of each other. In this regard, trade-off decisions do not result in a win-win situation, but rather
result in a win-lose situation. In economics, trade-offs are mostly discussed in the context of the opportunity to
realize different objectives such as economic, societal or environmental objectives. Trade-off analysis helps to
take decisions with information related to economic arguments (‘efficient allocation’), distributional arguments
(‘fair distribution’) and scale arguments (‘sustainable scale’) (Daly, 1992). In economics, trade decisions are
usually supported by a cost-benefit analysis, in which the monetary valuation of costs and benefits is outlined.