--- Modes of Transportation ---

302 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Modes of Transportation Food is transported in many forms, such as in small and palletized field containers, in bulk bins, in hand- loaded sacks, in wooden or plastic boxes and so on. Furthermore, food is transported by different modes of transportation, such as in animal-drawn carts, on bikes, by trucks, trains, boats and planes. The most energy efficient mode of transportation to transport food or other goods is by water, followed by rail, road and air (Pi- mentel and Pimentel, 1996).

Refrigeration Food should be adequately refrigerated during transport, this is crucial in terms of reducing losses. Refrigera- tion helps to reduce the rate that microbiological, physiological, biochemical and/or physical changes occur in food and thus helps to ensure safety and quality of food as well as the transportation of food over long dis- tances (Gac, 2002; James et al., 2006; Tassou, 2009; James and James, 2010). At present, less than 10 percent of all perishable food is refrigerated (Coulomb, 2008). According to the International Institute of Refrigeration (2009) over 200 million tonnes of perishable foodstuffs could be preserved, which is approximately 14 percent of the food currently consumed in these developing countries, if they could attain the same amount of refriger- ated equipment as in developed countries (James and James, 2010).

The level of perishable food that is being transported by air has increased by 10 to 12 percent a year since the 1990s (Stera, 1999). Even though food is able to be transported over vast distances within a shorter period of time, there are some disadvantages with air freighting of food. Among others, during a large part of the jour- ney, up to 80 percent of the total transportation time, the food is exposed to temperatures ranging from 15 to 20 degrees Celsius and often unprotected (Dellacasa, 1987).

Carbon dioxide emissions associated with transport One of the arguments often brought up in relation to reducing carbon emissions is producing food locally, because the amount of ‘food miles’ (the distance that food is transported from production to consumption) is reduced (Seyfang, 2006). However, the negative impact of these ‘food miles’ actually varies, depending on the mode of transportation, conservation and seasonality whether the overall environmental impact is lower for local foods. Bentley and Barker (2005) compared the transportation distance of seven locally produced foods with the shipping distance of the same imported food items so that the environmental impact of their trans- portation could be calculated (DEFRA, 2005). It was estimated that the imported items travelled on average a distance of 5 364 kilometres, which meant that the imported items travelled 81 times further than the local foods. As a result, carbon dioxide emissions were higher for the imports than for the locally produced foods.

However, there was one exception: the locally produced food items, which only travelled by truck, generated more carbon dioxide than the pears and apples from Portugal, which travelled 350 kilometres further by boat and truck.

If one looks at the whole food chain, the GHG emissions associated with transporting food is quite small com- pared to the overall GHG emissions generated within the whole food chain. It was calculated that 22 percent of the United Kingdom’s total GHG emissions was emitted by the commercial food sector, with 1.8 percent of total emissions accounting for food transport (DEFRA, 2005).

Eating locally and seasonally produced food to reduce GHGs Eating more locally and seasonally-produced food will reduce the generated GHG gas emissions that result from food transportation. However, one must not only consider the food travelling distance or the means by which it was transported, but also how the food was produced, processed, stored and distributed. Food pro- duced locally may be less economically and environmentally efficient due to less optimal growing conditions (Fuchs and Lorek, 2000). A study undertaken by Carlsson-Kanyama (1998) shows that tomatoes grown in greenhouses in Denmark, the Netherlands and Sweden had higher carbon dioxide equivalents than imported tomatoes grown under the sun in Spain.