--- using country-led approaches. At present, Botswana, Madagascar, Colombia, Costa Rica and the Philippines ---

369 MODULE 13: Mainstreaming CSA into National Policies and Programmes benefits often include elements that are not easily monetized. A programme is underway to pilot valuing natu- ral capital in national accounts through the WAVES (Wealth and Valuation of Ecosystems Services) initiative using country-led approaches. At present, Botswana, Madagascar, Colombia, Costa Rica and the Philippines are participating, together with a number of OECD countries including Norway and Spain. 13.4 Conclusions While principles for CSA and related sustainable development and food security policies may be similar, there are likely to be specific policy differences between agriculture-dependent economies, urban economies and economies in transition. There will also be differences between countries that are land or water-scarce and countries that have abundant land and water resources. To formulate CSA strategies and interventions reli- able information, including good quality data, documented vulnerabilities and accurate evidence is required.

In addition, national capacities to implement CSA interventions and current barriers to adoption need to be systematically assessed.

CSA contributes to a cross-cutting range of development goals. It needs to be implemented using an inte- grated, cross-sectoral approach to agriculture and food security that links it to other aspects of sustainable development, poverty reduction and economic growth. CSA policies and programmes, as with all cross-secto- ral development programmes, need to be developed so that they are aligned among all levels of government.

This requires an understanding of the structure and functioning of each level of government. Comprehensive capacities need to be developed because in many countries, local-level capacity development has not been included as part of the decentralization processes.

To create an enabling environment for the development and mainstreaming of CSA in the overarching national plan, appropriate institutions with effective and transparent governance structures are needed. These institu- tions would coordinate the division of sectoral responsibilities and the work done by national local institutions that will incorporate CSA strategies into legal and regulatory frameworks. Regulations need to be adapted to country environments and accompanied by other supporting incentives if CSA interventions are to be success- ful in changing behaviour and providing additional incentives for advancing CSA.

Investment in CSA brings long-term gains in productivity, builds resilience, reduces GHG emissions and in- creases carbon sequestration. The most successful programmes often blend sources of funding. Incentive measures need to focus on overcoming barriers to adoption of CSA practices. Price and non-price measures are needed to support transition to CSA. Behavioural change is also an important element. Price support cer- tainly has a role to play in countries affected by climate change, but often other forms of support (regulations, incentives, capacity development, investments in technology, innovation, efficiency gains and infrastructure, connectivity or the broader enabling environment, social protection and safety nets, and use of social capital) are more effective in paving the way for CSA.

Civil society, the private sector and financial institutions all play vital roles in implementing CSA. These groups should work jointly with key national line ministries and development agencies and donors through an efficient stakeholder consultation process.

Notes This module was written by Majory-Anne Bromhead (World Bank) and Reuben Sessa (FAO) with contributions from Savis Joze Sadeghian (FAO) and reviewed by Leslie Lipper (FAO).