--- Page 66 ---

53 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems management is to find and promote synergies among production systems, livelihoods, biodiversity conserva- tion and ecosystem services, with the ultimate goal of ensuring sustainability.

This type of planning and management needs to be supported by governace structures, including policies and financial mechanisms that are all part of a multilevel governance process. This support would be incomplete without a comprehensive, participatory and user-friendly system for monitoring landscape management and assessing the progress being made towards reaching different objectives. Indicators in a landcape monitoring system could include biomass, income, and biodiversity .

Land use planning and decision-making processes Managing landscapes demands an understanding of how the needs of local communities can be addressed without eroding biodiversity and disprupting the functioning of ecosystems. To achieve successful outcomes, the people who have an impact on the landscape must come together to plan and negotiate acceptable prac- tices and management actions.

Ensuring the participation of all stakeholders is key for sustainably managing landscapes and increasing the scale of CSA. Facilitating participatory decision-making processes is essential for fostering collaboration and sharing information among different stakeholders. Often, stakeholders have different visions and understand- ings of landscape planning and goals. The negotiation of the elements that are to be included in a landscape management planning process is vital to avoid conflicts and tension as well as create space for dialogue. Ne- gotiation processes involve taking note of all stakeholders’ interests in the formulation of land-use plans. They must follow procedures and rules that the stakeholders have agreed upon in advance and that are enforced by a credible and legitimized third party. The negotiation and planning process can be facilitated through the development of a database that integrates local and scientific sources of information on the state of land re- sources (e.g. soil, water and biological resources) and various drivers of change, including climate information (see Box 2.6 for an example of such an assessment).

Box 2.6 An example of the assessment approach for landscape planning and management The Land Degradation Assessment in Drylands (LADA) project has developed a methodology and tools for assessing a number of factors relating to land management, including: the status and trends in land resources; the drivers of land degradation and sustainable land management (SLM); impacts on ecosystem services and livelihoods; and the effects of response measures adopted by land users and promoted by different stakeholders. The methodology shifts attention from the conventional focus, which assesses the biophysical aspects of land degradation, to a balanced assessment that looks at both negative and positive effects of land management, trends in land use and management of natural resources, as well as ecosystem services and livelihoods. The methodology integrates socio-economic aspects into land-use planning and management.

The main emphasis of the assessment is on the current status and dynamics of land resources (e.g. soil, water and vegetation) and the delivery of the main provisioning services for livelihoods (e.g. food, fodder, fuel, water, income).

A second important consideration is the need to identify and evaluate the significant impacts of land management practices on the supporting and regulating ecosystem services that determine productivity and ecosystem resilience (e.g. soil nutrients and organic matter, carbon cycling, maintenance of the hydrological cycle and water supply and the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity). Besides income and food security, other socio-cultural factors (e.g. knowledge management, the capacity of land users to organize themselves and adapt to change) are considered.

The LADA approach is intended to enhance the capacity of users to conduct integrated and participatory assessments of land degradation, and monitor the impacts of interventions or changes in land management. As it serves as a baseline diagnostic, the assessment should be undertaken at the beginning of the SLM investment planning for integrated landscape management. By identifying the most suitable SLM practices for preventing and mitigating degradation through participatory discussions with the communities and stakeholders, the assessment results can be used to inform SLM interventions and improve their design, planning and implementation. The assessment can be fed into national inventories and contribute to national agricultural and environmental strategies and reports to international conventions.

Source: Bunning et al., 2011