--- FAO’s statistical database FAOSTAT). ---

176 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK stock is also heavily concentrated in a small group of species. While more than 30 mammalian and bird species have been domesticated, three species (cattle, chickens and pigs) account for about 88 percent of the world’s annual meat production from livestock, two species (cattle and buffaloes) for about 96 percent of milk produc- tion and just one species (chickens) for about 92 percent of egg production (figures for 2011 as recorded in FAO’s statistical database FAOSTAT).

The world’s aquatic ecosystems contain over 175 000 species of fish, molluscs, crustaceans and aquatic plants (FAO, forthcoming). The widespread domestication and selection in aquatic species has only recently begun, but rapid progress is being made. FAO estimates that over 350 species of fish and aquatic invertebrates and plants are farmed around the world. However, only ten species (comprised of shellfish, crustaceans, plants and fin fish) account for half of the total aquaculture production (FAO, 2013a). The processes of domestication and selection have created significant inter- and intra-specific diversity (see also Module 10 on fisheries and aquaculture).

Forests are home to over 80 percent of terrestrial biodiversity. Genetic diversity provides the fundamental basis for evolution of forest tree species, enabling them to adapt to changing and adverse conditions (see also Module 9 on forestry). There are over 80 000 tree species, but less than one percent of these have been studied in any depth for their present and future potential. As a result of pressure on forest lands and the effects of unsustain- able use of forest resources, the great potential of forest genetic resources, including their potential for coping with climate change, is at risk of being lost forever, before it can be identified, let alone utilized (FAO, 2013c).

Micro-organisms (e.g. bacteria and fungi) and invertebrates (e.g. insects, arachnids and earthworms) are the most numerous groups of species on Earth. They contribute to the delivery of essential ecosystem services, in- cluding regulating services, such as disease and pest control; and supporting services, such as the decompo- sition of organic matter and nitrogen fixation, which contribute to maintaining healthy soils. Micro-organisms and invertebrates are also essential in many food and agro-industrial processes, including fermentation (e.g. for yoghurt and cheese) and bioremediation, (e.g. the use of micro-organism metabolism to remove pollutants or other contaminants). Pollination services by animals, especially insects, affect 35 percent of the world’s crop production and increase the outputs of 87 of the world’s leading food crops (FAO, 2013b).

The exchange of genetic material among farmers, local communities and breeders has been common practice in the food and agriculture sector. Production systems and technologies, including their associated genetic diversity, have frequently been transferred to other countries and regions. As a result, a significant part of the genetic diversity used in food and agriculture today is of exotic origin, and few countries are self-sufficient in terms of their genetic resources for food and agriculture (Palacios, 1998). Most countries need to access genetic resources from elsewhere for their agricultural production and food security. Consequently, these countries should be regarded as interdependent when it comes to genetic resources. In the future, it can be expected that the challenges posed by climate change will increase the trend towards greater international exchange of genetic resources for food and agriculture (Schloen et al., 2011). 6.2 Genetic resources for food and agriculture: a prerequisite for climate-smart agriculture Climate change and genetic resources for food and agriculture have a two-way relationship. On the one hand, climate change severely threatens genetic resources. On the other hand, there is a growing recognition that conserving and using genetic diversity is essential for coping with climate change.

Climate change puts stress on and poses many risks to genetic resources for food and agriculture. In gen- eral, climate change is expected to change species distribution, population sizes, community composition, the timing of biological events and the behaviour of many species. Climate change will also affect ecosystem dynamics in various ways. Potential consequences include asynchrony between crop flowering and the pres- ence of pollinators, and increasingly favourable conditions for invasive alien species, pests and parasites. As