--- The Basic Aims of CBIWM Approach ---

433 MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience Box 15.8 Community-based integrated watershed management approach to DRR and climate change adaptation in Uganda Uganda is prone to droughts, floods, windstorms and hailstorms, landslides and crop and livestock diseases. The water- related hazards make up over 90 percent of the natural disasters and each year destroy an average of 800 000 hectares of crops (UNDP et al., 2009). These natural hazards are exacerbated by increasing environmental degradation. The most disaster-prone communities are located along the dry arid and semi-arid areas of the Cattle Corridor that stretches across the country. According to Uganda’s 2007 National Adaptation Program of Action, the country experienced seven drought episodes between 1991-2000 (Uganda NAPA, 2007). Also, in recent years, floods and landslides triggered by tropical cyclones and severe storms have become one of the most devastating natural hazards in Uganda.

FAO Uganda is currently promoting a community-based integrated watershed management (CBIWM) approach to planning, which integrates DRR and climate change adaptation strategies. The approach addresses socio-economic development, the restoration of the environment’s ecological integrity and institutional capacity development. This integrated, intersectoral approach places communities at the centre of the process and enables them to make qualified decisions about DRR based on watershed ecosystem functions and their interaction with natural resource management practices. Building and strengthening watershed organizations and linking them with District Disaster Management Committee and Village Disaster Management Committees is crucial. Farmer field schools are used to increase the knowledge and skills of farmers and pastoralists. Farmers can then solve problems for themselves and undertake their own initiatives in DRR and climate change adaptation. The conceptual and operational framework of community-based integrated watershed management for DRR and climate change adaptation is presented in Figures 15.3 and 15.4 below.

FAO conducted a week-long intensive training for personnel from local district governments, the United Nations and NGOs in the Karamoja region in North Eastern Uganda to enhance their knowledge and skills in planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating CBIWM programmes. Each district that participated developed draft action plans on how to apply and replicate the approach in their local environment. As a result of the training, the Local Government of Moroto District has initiated an improved community-based watershed management programme in the Musopo watershed.

The CBIWM is consistent with, and supports the current efforts of the Uganda Ministry of Water and Environment to put into action catchment–based water resources management. Also, a recent Joint Programming Agreement between FAO and the World Food Programme in Uganda is being operationalized using a CBIWM approach in five districts of Karamoja.

Figure 15.8 The conceptual and operational framework of CBIWM for DRR and CCA ENTRY PHASE (Pre-watershed Management Phase - Awareness, sensitization and community mobilization) PREPARATORY PLANNING PHASE (Participatory Dister Risk Assesment and planning) IMPLEMENTATION PHASE (Building Community resilience against Disaster risk) PHASING OUT/ WITDRAWAL PHASE (Consolidation of project outcomes/ achievements) First Stage Second Stage Third Stage Fourth Stage Watershed community VDMC = Village Disaster Management Committee WDA = Watershed Development Association DDMC = District Disaster Management Committee DLG = District Local Government FFS = Farmer Field School Local Government DLG and DDMC Technical Facilitating Agency Institutional Development (strengthening community Institutional capacity) Socio-economic Development (creating opportunities for Income and livelihood) Restoring Ecologica Integrity (improving biophysical Condition of watershed) The Basic Aims of CBIWM Approach Coordination WDA/ VDMC/ FFS Disaster Risk Reduction/ CCA (Enhanced community Resilience)