--- gies for Climate-Resilient and Environmentally Sound Agricultural Production (C-RESAP) in the Yellow River ---

30 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK The emphasis on resource efficiency has obvious environmental co-benefits. It preserves natural resources, water, resources, both agrobiodiversity and wild biodiversity (by preserving land). The project Enhanced Strate- gies for Climate-Resilient and Environmentally Sound Agricultural Production (C-RESAP) in the Yellow River Basin (Licona Manzur and Rhodri, 2011) aiming to contribute to the adaptation of vulnerable communities to climate change and to reduce the impact of agricultural practices on the environment provides a good example of these potential synergies. When focussing on a single environmental issue (here climate change) potential trade-offs with other issues have to be identified and addressed (IFAD, 2012b).

CSA shares objectives and principles with sustainable intensification of crop production. Sustainable crop pro- duction intensification (SCPI) can be summed up in the words “save and grow”. Sustainable intensification means a productive agriculture that conserves and enhances natural resources. It uses an ecosystem ap- proach that draws on nature’s contribution to crop growth – soil organic matter, water flow regulation, pol- lination and natural predation of pests – and applies appropriate external inputs at the right time, in the right amount to improved crop varieties that are resilient to climate change and use nutrients, water and external inputs more efficiently. A CSA approach adds a more forward looking dimension, more concern about future potential changes and the need to be prepared for them. 1.5 Conclusions and focus of the sourcebook Addressing food security and climate change challenges has to be done in an integrated manner. To increase food production and to reduce emissions intensity, thus contributing to mitigate climate change, food systems have to be more efficient in the use of resources. To ensure food security and adapt to climate change they have to become more resilient.

This has to happen globally, worldwide and everywhere. Increased efficiency in one part of the world provides food and income where it takes place but it also provides more food, globally and thus can provide food else- where and reduce its cost, globally. With increased risks, increasing resilience of the worldwide food system also means that efficiency and resilience have to be improved everywhere, so as to spread risk. Therefore CSA is a dynamic approach that concerns all farmers, all over the world. But developing countries are more at risk of food insecurity. They are more at risk of climate change. They also have more potential for mitigation (and adaptation?), because they have to increase their production more, and because there is an important effi- ciency gap. On the other hand developing countries have less means, policies and institutions to address these challenges. Therefore, this book will be primarily aimed at developing countries.

The changes outlined in this book have to be supported by efforts to harness consumption. Consumption patterns play an important role in the increased demand on agriculture, on the impact of food systems on environment and also on food security. More sustainable patterns of consumption would, in particular, play an essential role to mitigate climate change (HLPE 2012a). Sustainable diets are defined by FAO as “those diets with low environmental impacts that contribute to food and nutrition security and to healthy lives for present and future generations. Sustainable diets are protective and respectful of biodiversity and ecosystems, cultur- ally acceptable, accessible, economically fair and affordable, nutritionally adequate, safe and healthy, while optimizing natural and human resources” (FAO, 2010d). But, to a great extent the tools, policies and institu- tions that could influence consumption and diets, especially in developed countries, are very different from those that would be used to transform agricultural systems. This is why this book does not address, as such, the issue of consumption patterns as a driver of environmental impact.