--- Page 555 ---

542
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Annex
A.18.1 Methods and tools for monitoring and evaluation

Basic tools
Most of the tools necessary for measuring the indicators and processes for the monitoring and evaluation of
climate change related interventions are standard monitoring and evaluation tools, the most prominent of
which are worth noting:
Participatory poverty assessment: helps to assess who are the most vulnerable in the community as defined by
community members’ own criteria. This helps to identify key intervention target groups.
Project and programme baseline assessments: done through surveys of intervention and control areas, meas-
uring food security, incomes, basic household assets and services, as well as environmental parameters.
Regular project monitoring: gathering of activity and output progress data, financial management information,
and signalling emerging issues or good practices.
Management information Systems: web-based support systems increasingly managed through remote de-
vices, linked to financial management and GIS systems.
Agriculture and natural resource management monitoring: measured at frequencies and scales significant
enough to provide meaningful information. The measurements can be done by a range of methods from struc-
tured crop to participatory transect walks.
Process monitoring: often done in support of regular monitoring to assess project process and institutional
changes and relationships – to rapidly identify management responses.
Participatory monitoring and evaluation methods: a wide range of methods engaging communities, not just
enhancing information gathering but also increasing ownership and project adaptation.
Impact evaluation methodology: Impact evaluation assesses the impact of an intervention using counterfactual
analysis. The estimated impact of the intervention is calculated as the difference in mean outcomes between
a ‘treatment group’ (those receiving the intervention) and a ‘control group’ (those who don’t). This is done
through randomization (experimental design), pipeline and matching. While it has been used little in climate
change context so far, and faces some challenges there, due to the scales and externalities and process ori-
entation, impact evaluation is increasingly advocated to understand attribution, has been applied to mitigation
programs, and is often applied in agricultural and rural development and natural resource management pro-
jects. (Prowse and Snilstveit, 2009)
Stakeholder, Institutional and legal assessments: To assess changes in capacity, human resources, organiza-
tional systems, coordination, as well as laws and policies.
Economic and Financial analysis (EFA): using mainly agricultural, environmental and socio-economic data,
as well as detailed market, labour and trade information, analyses are made of the economic and financial
returns at household, farm and system levels.
Supporting good practices in monitoring and evaluation methods
Experience has shown the above tools by themselves may be implemented mechanically without great useful-
ness for decision making. Some useful practices in relation to strengthening monitoring and evaluation have
been noted: