--- Page 76 ---

63
MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems
The landscape approach
Implementation of the EAFA through participatory planning and management with an ecosystem perspective, can allow
fishers and fish farmers to maintain and increase food and income from fish products in the Estero Real, while preserving
ecosystem services and increasing community resilience to climate change and other factors. Implementation of the
ecosystem approach in Estero Real has been led by national and local fisheries and aquaculture institutions, with FAO
technical support.
The first stage of the pilot project involved the following steps:
1.Discussions were held with government authorities to make a first estimate of the goals and scope of the project.
2.Field visits and participatory workshops were conducted in the closest locality to the Estero Real. They included fisheries
and environment authorities at the national and local level, representatives of fishers, fish farmers, local municipalities,
NGOs, universities and the Ramsar area management authority. The discussions had the following goals:
-- introduce the EAFA’s concepts and methodology to the relevant stakeholders;
-- review information and establish consensus on what are the current social, environmental and governance issues
that need to be addressed in the Estero Real in the fisheries and aquaculture sector and other external factors
affecting the sector.
-- perform a risk-based prioritization exercise using a participatory process based on a description of the key issues
to identify the highest priorities.

The second stage of the pilot implementation involved gathering relevant inputs for the development of an EAFA
implementation plan based on the agreed priorities. This involved collecting the information and resources needed to
address issues identified in the workshops (e.g. clarifying concepts and methodologies to assess the environmental status
of Estero Real). Some of the most important activities in this stage included: carrying capacity estimates of the estuary for
shrimp culture and other fishery activities; designing an improved integrated environmental monitoring programme; and
developing a hydrodynamic model of the estuary. During the second stage, support programmes and instruments were
elaborated. For example, a programme was set up to help people who are practicing unsustainable bag-fishing engage in
other economic activities, such as aquaculture, apiculture and mangrove planting.
The third stage of the project involves the development of the EAFA implementation and management plan and road map that
has been validated with stakeholders. At this stage, a set of indicators is agreed and monitored and human and economic
resources are made available. This is required, for example, to implement the alternative livelihood programme for fishers.
This stage is the most challenging because it requires a profound local engagement, political will and commitment on the
part of national and relevant authorities. There is also a need for negotiations between different institutions and political
will to recognize the social value of the fisheries sector. Often this stage requires external donor support. It is advisable to
streamline such support to capacity development and technical strengthening of relevant stakeholders. The EAFA in Estero
Real is currently going through this stage.
Lessons learned and recommendations
• An ecosystem approach to watershed management is needed to address landscape issues, such as sedimentation
and pollution from tributaries. This approach must include and integrate fisheries, aquaculture, agriculture and
forestry. Fragmentation of institutions has so far been an obstacle. The implementation of an EAFA often opens an
opportunity for wider ecosystem approach management in coastal zones and watersheds. The social role of fisheries
and aquaculture must be recognized, especially considering their role in poverty alleviation and food security. This will
become particularly important as the impacts of climate change (e.g. droughts) become more pronounced.
• The involvement of national and local authorities and stakeholders from the beginning is fundamental. Establishing
ownership of the process among the stakeholders, building trust among all parties and promoting relevant decision-
making power at different levels is the best way to move forward in implementing an ecosystem approach to fisheries
and aquaculture.
• Coastal fishery and aquaculture communities have become better informed and more resilient to the impacts of
climate change and other threats.
• Better integration is needed between fisheries, environment, agriculture and resource management institutions.