--- The extensive Ruoergai peatlands on ---

68 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case study 2.6 Ecosystem services of peatlands of the Ruoergai Plateau The Ruoergai peatland pastures on the Tibetan Plateau: a major milk and meat producing area in China Photo: Chen Kelin Introduction The extensive Ruoergai peatlands on the eastern Tibetan Plateau are a major link between the Tibetan uplands and large lowland rivers. These peatlands, which serve as grazing lands, contain an estimated carbon content of 750 megatonnes (Björk, 1993); a significant proportion of Chinese peat carbon resources. Home to numerous endangered and endemic species, the peatlands are important reservoirs of biodiversity (Tsuyuzaki et al., 1990; Ekstam, 1993; Schaller, 1998).

Throughout history, the peatlands on the Ruoergai Plateau have acted like sponges. They absorbed and retained water during periods when water supplies were abundant and slowly released water when it was scarce. In this way, the peatlands slowed down peak discharge, prevented erosion, reduced downstream flooding and guaranteed a steady supply of water to the Huanghe (Yellow) River, a water source that millions of people depend on.

The introduction of livestock grazing 5 000 years ago completely changed the peatlands on the Ruoergai Plateau.

Sedimentation of clay, silt and sand from the grazed mineral uplands combined with the continuous passing of yaks caused the peatlands to lose their spongy character. As a result, the peat has become more compact and is much more susceptible to erosion (Joosten et al., 2008). At the same time, herders developed a complex system of land management, which included sharing grazing lands and their rotational use to prevent overgrazing and erosion. This system of resource management is part of the unique cultural heritage of communities on the Ruoergai Plateau. Not only in Ruoergai but in the entire high altitude of the Himalayan region, peatlands still function as grazing pastures for nomadic herders, especially when the peatlands are frozen or not completely waterlogged. Eighty percent of the peatlands on the Tibetan Plateau are grazed or browsed by domestic animals in winter and early summer. The herders prefer peatlands because of the early plant growth, the higher productivity of forage, the better nutrient availability due to the diversity of forage species, and the availability of water for watering and cooling the livestock.

Peatland degradation increased dramatically with the construction of roads in the 1970s and the rising demand for food, fuel and rangeland. Overgrazing and the resulting decrease in the quality of pasture fuelled the demand for new rangeland.

This led to increased pressure on untouched peatlands (Wiener et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2006; Gao et al., 2009), of which almost 50 percent were drained (Yang, 2000).

To increase milk and meat production, traditional husbandry was replaced by a more market-oriented economy. Collective livestock and pastures were divided and allocated to individual households (Yan and Wu, 2005). Pastures were fenced and more infrastructure was developed. Livestock numbers increased dramatically and migration routes of animals were blocked (Li et al., 1986; Long and Ma, 1997), which aggravated overgrazing, peatland degradation, erosion and desertification. Peatlands in Ruoergai were leased to individual Tibetan herders, and this led to long-term conflicts between nature conservation and livestock grazing (Yan and Wu, 2005). The more sedentary managing system brought about new challenges not only for pastoral development but also for peatland conservation. Currently, the peatlands provide irreplaceable grazing ground for thousands of yaks, horses and sheep that are central to the livelihoods of local herder families and provide the country with animal products. Healthy peatlands can also create employment in other areas, such as tourism.