--- Source: adapted from Engle, 2011 ---

503 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation • assess present and future vulnerability from past information. • The resilience approach, on the other hand, tends to: • be oriented towards ecological sciences; • be more focused on complex interactions, feedbacks and processes of social-ecological systems; • be conceptual and not easily translatable into practice; • assess one particular system and not be often generalized for wider application; • produce more dynamic assessments (but present methodological difficulties in measuring and characterizing); • be less focused on the social aspects of social-ecological systems; and • assess more positively future needs by building on present assets.

These concepts have evolved over recent years and recently, the resilience framework has started to put more emphasis on the social systems (i.e. livelihood resilience) and the vulnerability framework has started to in- clude more environmental factors. Despite their differences, the two frameworks can be connected through the concept of adaptive capacity (Figure 18.4). Adaptive capacity assessments from both a vulnerability and resilience perspective are recommended. An important common element will always be the specific identifica- tion of target groups and areas in relation to livelihoods and food security systems.

Figure18.4 Vulnerability and resilience frameworks linked through the concept of adaptive capacity Vulnerability Resilience Adaptive Capacity Source: adapted from Engle, 2011 Climate impact assessments provide an important interface among science, policy and the public. Better com- munication should be encouraged among these three different distinct communities: the climate science com- munity, the impact assessment community and the CSA community. An effective climate impact assessment must incorporate a wide variety of stakeholders to validate the process, interpret the results and translate them into adaptation and mitigation options that support CSA outcomes.

CSA options assessment Following climate impact assessments, CSA options assessments examine the extent to which different CSA measures may achieve the objectives of increasing productivity, enhancing climate change adaptation and mitigation, and improving food security, given the expected impacts of climate change. This helps practition- ers identify effective CSA options and creates synergies for reaching multiple objectives. CSA projects can be formulated to implement the identified measures. CSA strategies should ideally be reviewed and updated periodically as new information becomes available and the baseline evolves. Complementing the information given by Table 18.2, Table 18.3 presents examples of assessed benefits of CSA practices in fostering productiv- ity, climate change adaptation and mitigation and food security.