--- © Alain Paul Andrianaivo ---

201 MODULE 7: Climate-smart crop production system Agricultural intensification also requires fertile and healthy soils. Nutrient deficiencies and soil-borne pests and diseases are major limiting factors for crop production, especially on degraded soils in large areas of Af- rica and Southeast Asia. For example, the parasitic weed, Striga (Box 7.5), causes less damage when found in healthy soils. Even the damage caused by pests not found in the soil, such as maize stem borers, is reduced in healthy soils.

In addition, the maintenance and enhancement of soil health contributes to food security in “more direct ways.” A large portion of global crop production is taken up by maize, rice, wheat and other crops, such as oil crops. For human nutrition, however, a healthy diet is based on the variety of crops. These provide a range of essential nutrients, vitamins and minerals, and fruits and vegetables of high nutritional value. In addition, crop variety not only provides food, fuel and fibre goods, but also environmental services. For example, pulses are an important part of local food crops in developing countries and are a key source of protein in the diets of the world’s poorest countries. In farming systems, pulses represent an input-saving and resource-conserving technology because they fix nitrogen in the soil and thereby reduce the need for chemical fertilizer. The cultiva- tion of pulses also reduces soil pathogens (FAO, 2012b).

Conservation agriculture is an example of an approach that manages natural biological processes for resource- saving agricultural crop production. It aims at achieving competitive agricultural yields while helping to reduce degradation of natural resources. Undisturbed soil with a sufficient supply of organic matter provides a good habitat for soil fauna. Avoiding mechanical soil tillage increases the populations of earthworms, millipedes, Box 7.5 Climate change may influence Striga distribution and invasive potential © Alain Paul Andrianaivo Striga, considered to be one of the biggest obstacles to food production in Africa, includes about 40 species, of which 11 species are parasites on agricultural crops (FAO, 2003). It is a parasitic weed that enters the roots of other plants and removes their essential nutrients and reduces their growth.

The weed is one of the major constraints to the production of cereals and legumes in sub-Saharan Africa. On average, Striga infests as much as 40 million hectares of farmland in sub-Saharan Africa. It can cause yield losses of up to 100 percent (IAASTD, 2009) and an average reduction in productivity of 12 to 25 percent. In Africa, it affects the livelihoods of about 300 million people (FAO, 2003).

The monoculture of cereals, in which farmers use continuous cropping and follow poor agronomic practices such as the lack of crop rotation, promotes the formation of Striga. This is particularly true in agro-ecosystems where high human population densities put strong pressures on arable land. Striga has been known to have devastating effects on many food crops, specifically maize (Zea mays), sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) and sugar cane (Saccharum officinarum) (Eplee, 1992) and represents a real threat to cereal production and food security of affected countries.

To deal with striga, people hand-weed the land, but in extreme cases where there is heavy infestation, the only option is to abandon the farm land. However, abandonment only increases the parasite pressure in contaminated fields, as the seed can remain dormant and viable in the soil for at least 5 to 10 years (Parker and Riches, 1993). Farmers use a variety of pest control methods (organic manure, crop rotation, fallow), but the results can often be unsatisfactory.

A rational combination of pest control methods (cultural, biological and low risk pesticides) prevents spread of pests, provides better protection for the crops and improves yields. In particular, the introduction of legumes (e.g. mucuna) into the crop rotation as cover and catch crop tends to suppress the incidence of Striga. Projects have been implemented in Benin, Burkina-Faso, the Niger, Mali and Senegal to compare different management methods to alleviate the problem (FAO, 2008b).

Stiga thrives in temperatures of 30 to 35 degrees Celsius under semi-arid conditions. Climate change that leads to increased temperatures or affects rainfall patterns may influence the geographic distribution and invasive potential of Striga (Cotter et al., 2012).