--- , 2012). The Agriculture Sector Wide Approach (ASWAp) is the ---

383 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture It is useful to categorize adaptation in terms of how it alters the projection of agricultural investment needs for development – in terms of amount, timing and type of investment required. This entails estimating the additional costs adaptation imposes on agricultural investments. Some studies have been done on this issue at global, national and local levels with various methods employed. For example, the United Nations Frame- work Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) estimated an additional US$ 14 billion would be required annually for adaptation in agriculture globally, divided equally between developing and developed countries (Parry et al., 2009).

Nelson et al. (2009) estimate the negative impacts of climate change on crop productivity and then on child malnutrition. Their model’s results indicate that approximately US$ 7.1 billion is needed annually in addi- tional productivity enhancing investments to counteract the negative impacts of climate change and maintain a baseline level of welfare, of which US$ 3 billion would be for sub-Saharan Africa, and US$ 1.5 billion for South Asia.

It is important to recognize that these studies are generally based on calculating the additional resources climate change adaptation necessitates – assuming that the base investment requirements for development are in place (Parry et al., 2009). As the discussion in the previous section has indicated, this is generally not the case, and particularly in the case of the two most vulnerable agricultural areas in the world – sub-Saharan African and South Asia— there is a large deficit in investment resources. This is the adaptation deficit and it is the main reason these countries are considered so highly vulnerable to climate change.

Another important issue to consider is the potential costs of maladaptation (e.g. agricultural investments that increase vulnerability to climate change or increase risks of economic losses associated with unsustainable and unprofitable investments). Investments, particularly large fixed capital investments with significant life- times, are particularly vulnerable to being maladaptive if climate risks are not considered. An example that is likely to be maladaptive and essentially add to the adaptation deficit is a case where major capital expenditures on irrigation systems use outdated estimates of water demand and supply in areas where climate change is predicted to have major impacts.

Screening agricultural investment plans for their degree of “climate smartness” is a simple first step that can be taken to identify the potential overlap between adaptation and development investments, as well as poten- tial maladaptive agricultural investments. FAO (2012b) presents a simple screening methodology and applies it to a set of agricultural investment plans developed under the Comprehensive African Agricultural Develop- ment plans (FAO, 2012b). The screening methodology considers the potential contribution of planned activities to various aspects of adaptation as well as mitigation.

The conclusion of the screening was that there potentially is a high degree of “climate smartness” in existing agricultural investment planning, although more detailed analysis for specific locations and climate change effects would be needed.

A more detailed analysis of the potential investment costs likely to be associated with CSA activities was con- ducted for Malawi, using the screening methodology applied to the national agricultural strategy and invest- ment plan as a starting point (Branca et al., 2012). The Agriculture Sector Wide Approach (ASWAp) is the national agricultural plan for Malawi, and it includes prioritization and target scales for major agricultural in- vestment activities. Using information from the ASWAp, as well as indicative investment costs from a range of sources, Branca et al. (2012) developed the estimates shown in Table 14.3 below. This table shows the unit and total capital investment costs associated with priority agricultural investments that have high potential CSA characteristics (e.g. the potential to generate agricultural growth while incorporating the need for adaptation and mitigation).