--- Source: IPCC, 2008 ---

86 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Water is the prime channel through which the impacts of climate change on the world’s ecosystems and on the livelihoods of societies will be felt. Climate change will have an impact on every element in the water cycle (UN-Water, 2010). Agriculture will be affected by increased evaporative demand, changes in the amount of rainfall and variations in river runoff and groundwater recharge, the two sources of water for irrigation (Figure 3.1). These impacts are described in more details below.

Impact on water supply and demand A global increase in atmospheric temperatures is predicted to affect agricultural productivity. Particularly affected will be areas in low latitudes, where temperatures are already high. In these areas, heat waves will affect both crops and animals. An increase in temperatures will trigger increased demand for water for evapotranspiration by crops and natural vegetation, and will lead to more rapid depletion of soil moisture.

This scenario, combined with changes in rainfall patterns (see below), may lead to more frequent crop failures.

The hydrological cycle is expected to accelerate as rising temperatures increase evaporation from land and sea (Turral et al., 2011). Predictions about the patterns of change of annual precipitation are still in their in- fancy, but models tend to agree that there will be substantial changes at the regional level, including a sharp reduction of precipitation in already water-scarce areas, including the Mediterranean, Southern Africa, the Western United States, Mexico and Australia (Figure 3.2).

Figure 3.2 Large-scale relative changes in annual runoff for the period 2090–2099, relative to 1980–1999 White areas indicate where less than 66 percent of the ensemble of 12 models agree on the sign of change (whether there will be more or less runoff). Hatched areas are where more than 90 percent of models agree on the sign of change.

Source: IPCC, 2008