--- 2012a; FAO and OECD, 2012). ---

17 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries effects precisely, neither in time nor at the local scale needed for decision makers. Moreover, climate models do not deal with the consequences of increased variability, the impacts of stress combinations, the effects of climate change on whole agro-ecosystems, including crops, their pests and predators of these pests. As it is impossible to predict exactly these changes, it is often difficult to devise and promote precise adaptation measures. One of the most effective approaches to be prepared for uncertainty and new risks – a ‘no regret’ approach that is valid whatever changes happen – is to reduce vulnerability and increase resilience of a given system (FAO and OECD, 2012; HLPE, 2012a).

Risks Agricultural production is subject to risks of various types: economic and price-related risks, climatic, en- vironmental, pests and diseases, at different scales and, often, political instability. Yield risk in main staple crops is particularly important for smallholders who tend to consume a large part of their own production.

Farmers are also exposed to economic risks, including land tenure insecurity, variations in access to inputs (fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, feed) in quantity and quality and variations in access to markets. ‘Risk’ is used here to designate the potential of shocks and stresses that affect, in different ways, the state of systems, communities, households or individuals. Probability, uncertainty (when probabilities of occurrence or even nature of impacts are unknown), severity, economic scale, time scales and direct and indirect costs are all factors that should be taken into account.

Risks affecting agricultural activities are generally categorized according to the nature of the associated shocks (e.g. biophysical, economic) (Eldin et Milleville, 1989; Holden et al., 1991; Cordier, 2008; OECD, 2009).

They are also often classified according to the intensity, frequency and predictability (degree of uncertainty) of the associated shocks. They can be also categorized according to their impacts and their nature, as well as their importance and scope both in space and time (INEA, 2011). Weather is in itself a major cause of risk and also has a major influence on other types of risks. Climate change is expected to affect the nature, ex- tent and intensity of these risks, plant pests, animal diseases, and disruption of ecosystem functions (HLPE, 2012a; FAO and OECD, 2012).

The impact of a risk depends on the shock itself and on the resilience of the system that receives the shock.

Depending on their vulnerability, different systems will be more or less affected by the same shock. Depend- ing on their resilience, different systems will recover more or less easily.

Food systems are by nature ecological, economic and social (Ericksen, 2008; Fussel and Klein, 2006). Each dimension has its own organization and interacts with the others. Food systems can be described and ana- lyzed in each of their dimensions. There are also theories attempting to understand and describe ‘complex systems’ (Holling, 2001; Gunderson and Holling, 2001) to obtain a better grasp of the concept of sustainability.

Even when considering a single simple farming system, a single stress or shock can have various impacts of diverse nature and time scale. The global impact of a shock often also depends on the transmission of its effects from one dimension (biophysical) to the others (economic and social) and from one level (household) to another (community).

For instance, a drought in livestock grazing systems (see Figure 1.2) reduces the availability of water and grass – both directly and indirectly because as the watering points are reduced some pastures are no more accessi- ble- and so increases the demand for feed at the very moment when there is less feed available. Increased de- mand drives a feed price increase, which forces livestock owners to sell their cattle. Massive sales while there is a reduced demand push down cattle prices, forcing livestock owners to sell even more to buy feed. These effects on prices reduce farm and household income and assets. Moreover, they reduce the value of assets (livestock) and productive capital for the future. Prolonged or repeated drought also has long-lasting degrading effects on land. The combination of drought and overgrazing, particularly near watering points, destroys the vegetal cover and increases soil erosion.