--- Page 124 ---

111
MODULE 4: Soils and their management for CSA
A soil’s productivity depends on its physical, chemical and biological properties. Of particular importance are
its mineral composition, organic matter content, soil life and associated biological activity. Sandy soils are
the least productive as they do not have the capacity (unlike clay soils and silty soils) to retain moisture and
nutrients through chemical attraction (electrical charge). However, sandy soils can be managed productively
even in hot, dry climates if there is access to required water, organic materials and fertilizers to nourish plant
growth.
4.2 Challenges of climate change to soils
With global warming, rainfall levels are expected to decline in many places, and/or to occur in more intense
events, and evaporation and transpiration rates are projected to increase. These changes will reduce the avail-
ability of soil moisture for plant growth. The higher temperatures will also increase the rate of SOM decompo-
sition (mineralization), especially near the soil surface, which will affect the soil’s potential capacity to seques-
ter carbon and retain water. In the scientific literature, there is common consensus that the effect of higher
concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere and increases in temperature on photosynthesis and
net primary production, and hence on carbon fixation in the biomass, will not be sufficient to counterbalance
the GHG emissions due to the mineralization of SOM.
In cropping, grazing and forest systems, in particular, climate change and variability may affect soil health for
plant growth through:
• reduced or erratic rainfall and more frequent and severe periods of drought that lower the capacity of soils
to make water and nutrients available to plants;
• more intense rainfall and storms that increase the risk of soil erosion by water and wind (through rain
splash, accelerated runoff, strong winds); and
• increased soil surface temperatures and greater rates of mineralization of SOM.
Some soil properties, such as soil texture2, cannot be changed. Others can be modified and enhanced to enable
land users to adapt to climate change and mitigate the effects of global warming by increasing the soil’s capac-
ity to store water, supply nutrients to plants, sequester carbon and reduce GHG emissions.
• The soil properties and functions that are most important with regard to climate change are: soil struc-
ture3 and texture, organic matter content, nutrients, soil organisms, pH and cation exchange capacity.
These properties allow soils to fulfil their productive functions, especially their capacity to retain water.
Soil texture is the relative share of the different sizes of mineral particles (sand, silt and clay). It influences
the soil’s capacity to retain water and its ability to retain and exchange nutrients. Soil structure is the ar-
rangement of those particles into aggregates and the soil pores between them. Soil porosity depends on
both soil structure and texture and is very important for soil permeability. Unlike texture, soil structure can
be modified by tillage or traffic.

Different soil types and textures have different degrees of water permeability and provide different levels
of protection or bonding for SOM (Six et al., 2002). Sandy soils are highly permeable due to larger sand
grains and pore spaces. Consequently, they have low water retention capacity and offer limited protection
to organic matter compared to soils with a higher proportion of silts and clays, which attract and retain
water and nutrients.

2 Soil texture indicates the relative content of particles of various sizes, such as sand, silt and clay in the soil.
3 Soil structure is defined by the way individual particles of sand, silt, and clay are assembled. When single particles assemble they are
called aggregates. Aggregation of soil particles can occur in different patterns, resulting in different soil structures.