--- The Ministry of Food and Disaster Management executed a Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme ---

422 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK The application of risk assessments for various planning objectives is growing. Risk assessments are now used in land-use planning and territorial development, urban planning, the design of public infrastructure, scenario analysis and disaster preparedness. Some countries are starting to carry out risk assessments for develop- ment planning and public investment. Peru has been one of the pioneers in this respect. It has formally incor- porated disaster risk into its National System for Public Investment. A legal framework now requires disaster risk to be included in the evaluation criteria for public investment projects. The approval of financing rests on this evaluation. This ensures projects are not vulnerable to future disasters (UNISDR, 2010a). To support the mainstreaming of DRR into the National Public Investment System, particularly the project development and approval cycle, Peru’s Ministry of the Economy and Finance has developed standard methodologies and tools for national and local public institutions and government authorities. This includes an analysis of the location of public investments, its potential exposure to risks identified and the factors that can make them vulnerable.

In post-disaster situations, risk assessments are being used to guide prospective disaster risk management measures, such as sustainable land-use planning during the recovery process. These assessments enable sound spatial planning that can prevent the reconstruction of infrastructure in high risk areas exposed to re- current natural hazards. Following the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, the Office of the Special Envoy, in partnership with government agencies and other international organizations, undertook a rapid multi-hazard analysis to map the risk of floods, wind, tsunamis, landslides and earthquakes in the affected areas. They have used the results to guide the safe positioning of transitional shelters and support long-term recovery efforts. In Chile and Mexico, risk assessments are used to establish prerequisites for their Global Catastrophe Mutual Bonds.

In the Pacific Islands, the assessments are used to determine the viability of financial risk pooling opportuni- ties.

Combining risk assessment and climate change scenarios for effective CSA CSA proposes a shift away from single-objective production systems to the management of landscapes with multiple objectives (see for example Module 2 on landscape approach). This demands integrated planning and Box 15.2 The standardized community risk assessment model in Bangladesh Bangladesh promotes the use of scientific analysis, including the analysis of climate change impacts, as the basis for accurately assessing future risk related to all hazards, all sectors and all geographical areas. The country’s Disaster Management Model gives priority to defining the risk environment as the basis for developing ‘risk treatment options’. In this model, defining the risk environment involves: • understanding the social, political and community environment (establishing the context); • establishing the likely threats (identifying hazards and risks); • understanding the likelihood and consequences (analyse the risks); • ranking risks in priority (evaluate risks); and • determining what can be done to eliminate, reduce or manage risk (identify risk treatment strategies).

The Ministry of Food and Disaster Management executed a Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme (CDMP) as a national multi-hazard, multi-sector and multi-stakeholder strategy to build the capacity of local authorities and their communities to understand disaster management, assess risk, and provide local funding to implement priority DRR measures.

The CDMP supports local authorities and Union Disaster Management Committees to conduct standard community risk assessments (CRA) using participatory processes that identify, analyse and evaluate hazards, risks and vulnerabilities combining local knowledge with scientific data and predictions. The assessments follow an all- hazards, all-risks approach and are used in the formulation of risk-reduction plans and development projects.

Guidelines for CRA and for risk-reduction action planning procedures have been developed to facilitate this process.

Roughly 611 union action plans have been prepared following these guidelines (Djalante et al., 2010). The CRA process is considered a successful example that can be replicated across all risk environments. The intention is to expand its use across the country.

Source: UNISDR, 2010a