--- MODULE 13: Mainstreaming CSA into National Policies and Programmes ---

363 MODULE 13: Mainstreaming CSA into National Policies and Programmes and new patterns of energy production and consumption (see also Module 5 on energy). In some cases, govern- ments have subsidized production of agricultural commodities for bioenergy, for example maize in the United States (although the support measures were recently phased out) and rapeseed in Northern Europe. These sub- sidies are part of broader energy policies. However, life cycle analyses suggest these measures, in temperate ecosystems, cannot be considered climate-smart. On the other hand, life cycle analyses for bio-ethanol from sugar cane in tropical humid countries (e.g. Brazil) are likely to be climate-smart. The sustainable production and use of bioenergy presents a major opportunity to address climate change by reducing carbon dioxide emissions.

Whether or not these are climate-smart depends on the ecosystem, the underlying enabling environment and alternative land use options. In the implementation of CSA, there is a role for sustainable bioenergy production from woody biomass, crop residues and newer sources that are currently under development.

In many countries there is poor access to long-term finance, which is often a requirement for CSA. For in- stance, in Ghana, where the business environment is among the best in Africa, long-term finance for small- holder agriculture is not readily available. A range of non-price interventions (e.g. incentives, regulations, extension, and market access) are likely to provide better investment incentives than subsidized interest rates.

Improved access to long-term finance is important in tree crop cultivation where replacing older trees with newer, higher yielding varieties may lead to short-term revenue losses.

Regulations for adoption of CSA If they are successful in changing behaviour and providing incentives for adoption of CSA, national regulations need to be tailored to the country’s particular environmental conditions and accompanied by other supporting incentives.

Where broader institutional capacity and governance is weak, regulations alone are unlikely to be effective. For example, in the United Republic of Tanzania, a ban on charcoal trading proved to be unenforceable since char- coal is the main source for cooking energy for urban Tanzanians. However, a system of forest and woodland management administered by local districts in line with the national decentralization law has proven to locally acceptable and environmentally sustainable. This locally managed system has been combined with measures that promote the planting of trees.

For CSA to take hold, a mix of regulations and incentives is often needed. In the Loess Plateau watershed restora- tion programme in China, key elements for success included: the regulation of free grazing of small ruminants; technical support for improved fodder production for stall feeding; secure land rights for the farming population that participated in the watershed restoration programme; and technical support for restoring landscapes rand enhancing agricultural productivity. For decades, in the highly populated, densely farmed areas of Central and Western Kenya, where land rights are clear, there has been a requirement to plant trees and tree crops on 10 percent of the land. Many of the farmers exceed this percentage because of the income earned from the trees and the ecosystem services they provide. However, in Ghana, the current regulatory system for revenue allocation from timber harvesting outside forest reserves, in which revenues are divided between the Forestry Department Box 13.3 Increasing output, damaging the ecosystem: the use and misuse of input subsidies in India In India, fertilizer and other input subsidies contributed to the rapid development of irrigation and more intensive farming methods. This led to increases in yields and food security. By 2010, irrigated wheat yields in some provinces averaged 4.5 tonnes per hectare. Subsidized energy is now contributing to excess groundwater withdrawals. About 75 percent of groundwater used in Punjab and Harayana is withdrawn from overexploited aquifers. As a result, water must be to be pumped up from ever-deeper aquifers, and aquifers in some areas are becoming saline. The fertilizer subsidy, which cost the government US$ 30 billion (2 percent of GDP) in 2008, is contributing to excessive use of nitrogen, which is contributing to nitrate pollution in rivers and aquifers. There are, however, difficult and well recognized political economic challenges in reforming the pattern of subsidies.

Source: Barley et al., 2011