--- The recent Committee of World Food Security High Level Panel of Experts (CFS HLPE) Report on Social Pro- ---

453 MODULE 16: Making CSA work for the most vulnerable: the role of safety nets 16.1 Introduction One of the main challenges for the transition to CSA is to make it work for the most vulnerable communities.

As highlighted in Module 12 on local institutions, “evidence shows that households that are the least food secure are those that are least likely to take up new CSA practices” (Kristjanson et al., 2012). There are many reasons for this: where communities are faced with food insecurity, climate change adds to an already highly complex set of interrelated risks, often perpetuating cycles of poverty, food insecurity, vulnerability, unsustain- able production systems and overexploitation of natural resources.

The transition to resilient, adaptive and productive livelihood strategies, as envisaged by the concept of CSA, is an important element of the response to the food security and climate change challenge. But for CSA to be effec- tive and implemented at the required scale, it must be inclusive. That means it must be an accessible option also for the poorest and the most food insecure, and linked to efforts that ensure their access to food and nutrition.

For this, CSA must be context-specific and part of a broader approach to build resilience and empower mar- ginalized communities to take up opportunities – such as CSA – that could lift them out of hunger and poverty.

This module will look closer into how social protection, and in particular safety nets, can support the transi- tion to CSA in the context of vulnerability and food insecurity. The focus will be on adaptation, resilience and productivity elements of CSA, while potential mitigation co-benefits will only be outlined briefly. The module begins with a short overview of different types of social protection and safety nets. It will then outline the po- tential links between social protection and CSA, illustrated with several case studies. The module will conclude with some institutional and design issues to be considered in the establishment of safety nets. 16.2 Social protection and safety nets – a conceptual overview Social protection The recent Committee of World Food Security High Level Panel of Experts (CFS HLPE) Report on Social Pro- tection used the following definition of social protection: “Social protection describes all initiatives that: (1) provide income (cash) or consumption (food) transfers to the poor; (2) protect the vulnerable against livelihood risks; and (3) enhance the social status and rights of the excluded and marginalised” (HLPE, 2012a).

Beside safety nets, there are three other main types of social protection: labour market policies; social insur- ance, such as health insurance; and social services (e.g. access to social services for education, health, nu- trition and agriculture). Figure 16.1 provides an overview of different elements of social protection, including safety nets, which will be covered in more detail in the next paragraph.

Figure 16.1 The Different Elements of Social Protection Social Protection Labour Market Policies Social Insurance Social Safety Nets Social Services Unconditional Resource Transfers Conditional Resource Transfers Public and Community Work Programmes