--- The Challenge Dialogue SystemTM ---

338 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Equity issues Diversity, inclusion, and participatory approaches are critical to building the quality of social capital needed for the lasting uptake of resilience-enhancing climate-smart agricultural practices. Long product value chains can only realize their full climate-smart potential by considering the individual well-being of the many stake- holders involved. Attention to equity issues throughout these chains is required (Box 12.12) to ensure that the institutions do not (knowingly or unknowingly) discriminate against certain groups. Different inequalities and asymmetries call for different kinds of support. Key options are listed below.

Developing capacity Capacities should be developed so that all relevant stakeholders understand their own rights and can repre- sent their own interests in the inclusive planning processes that should underpin CSA project design (more on capacity development in Module 17).

Involving mediators Like partnership brokers, mediators must be strong communicators who can foster collaboration by helping to find common ground between disagreeing parties and helping to minimize obstructive hierarchies of influence.

Bringing external mediators on board may be worthwhile, as they can be accepted as impartial facilitators by involved parties. Respected figures (e.g. traditional leaders or religious guides and prominent advocates for a relevant issue) with eminence and legitimate authority can also draw attention to the issue at hand and play a powerful mediatory role within a given community or context.

Providing support mechanisms Evidence shows that the least food secure households are also those least likely to take up new CSA practices (Kristjanson et al., 2012). Support mechanisms, such as social safety net programmes (e.g. cash transfers, distribution of food, seeds and tools), can assist particularly vulnerable minorities or social groups by ensuring their access to a minimum amount of food and other vital social services. Recent initiatives in this area include Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Programme and Kenya’s Hunger Safety Net Programme. Both of these pro- grammes make it more likely that additional CSA efforts will benefit women, children and the poorest house- holds (more detail on social safety nets in Module 16).

Box 12.12 The Challenge Dialogue SystemTM The Challenge Dialogue System (CDS)TM is a corporate methodology for engaging diverse stakeholders in dialogue to help tackle a complex issue collaboratively, overcome deadlock and facilitate exchanges of information. The system is built around eight steps including: participant engagement and input-gathering; face to face interactions and virtual exchanges; outcome synthesis and integration; and the continuous reflection on the strategies being acted upon and their results.

CDSTM has been applied to a wide range of users, including: private sector actors seeking performance improvement; public sector actors seeking to enhance their information systems and decision-making processes (e.g. the Forestry Ministry of British Columbia, Canada); and networks between non-profit, public and private sector actors working on a common theme (e.g. The Food Innovation Network).

Source: Innovation Expedition Inc., 2006