--- CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security to launch participatory scenario ---

360 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK The CSA project explicitly assesses how climate change may alter the effectiveness of existing agricultural policy and investment frameworks in supporting food security and economic growth in partner countries; and policy options to overcome barriers to adoption of CSA practices. The experience from the project indi- cates that operationalizing CSA at the country level requires greater coordination between agriculture, climate change and food security policies, as well as better links between research and policy. Partnering with the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security to launch participatory scenario building is an approach the programme is employing to facilitate the needed dialogue and coordination. With this tool, stakeholders from government, the private sector, researchers and civil society explore key socio- economic uncertainties for future food security, environments and livelihoods. Multiple socio-economic sce- narios are developed by stakeholders, which can be used for ‘back-casting’ from future desired outcomes to current policy and investment needs across a range of possible conditions. By linking to quantitative models, the process can explicitly explore the potential costs and benefits of alternative development paths. Since policy-makers and researchers from agricultural, food security and climate change are all involved in the sce- nario development process, the process inherently generates greater coordination and dialogue across these different groups.

Interlinkages with existing strategies The most effective way of supporting resilient agricultural systems and rural communities is to incorporate adaptation into other policies (IISD, 2006). This has been the principle behind the Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR), one of the programmes supported through the Climate Investment Funds (CIF). PPCR has approved US$ 1 billion of grant and concessional finance for mainstreaming resilience into core programmes.

Agriculture and water management feature strongly in all participating countries. The PPCR may provide a useful model that countries can follow to access climate finance for adaptation in a development context under a future Green Climate Fund. Countries can building on the lessons from ongoing PPCR’s programmes and follow their implementation arrangements.

Providing an enabling legal and policy environment To secure an enabling environment for the development and mainstreaming of CSA in overarching national plans, appropriate institutions with effective and transparent governance structures are needed to coordinate the division of sectoral responsibilities and the work done by national and local institutions (more on institu- tions in Module 12). An enabling environment also requires capacity development of for all relevant stakehold- ers (more on capacity development in Module 17).

Landscape approaches and incentives are needed for a coordinated management of various land-based eco- system services. These approaches may require trade-offs, which would need to be explicitly quantified and addressed through negotiated solutions among various stakeholders. The scaling up of landscape approaches requires knowledge management and institutional capacity and must be backed up by an enabling policy and market environment. Coordinating sectoral policies is key to aligning the different goals (see also Module 2 on landscape approach).

CSA expenditure and planning There is a strong need for coordination for expenditure and planning between concerned agencies at the na- tional and local levels. In addition, cross-sectoral CSA strategies need to take account of current legislation and regulations and be incorporated into legal and regulatory frameworks if they are to be implemented. There a many areas where synergies can be created with CSA, including social safety nets (see Module 16 on safety nets); energy (see Module 5 on energy); land-use regulations; and disaster risk management (see Module 15 on disaster risk reduction).

Annual budget laws in which public expenditure planning is transposed into the budget allocation for the responsible line agencies, are a core legal and regulatory instrument for implementing CSA policies. In this regard, aligning capacity and financing with responsibility is critical. Operations and maintenance, as well as investment budgets, need to be considered. Raising new sources of revenue for implementing CSA strategies