--- eqv./kg FPCM at the farm gate. GHG emissions for Latin America and the Caribbean, Near East and ---

217 MODULE 8: Climate-smart Livestock Table 8.1 Direct and indirect impacts of climate change on livestock production systems Grazing system Non-grazing system Direct impacts • increased frequency of extreme weather events • increased frequency and magnitude of droughts and floods • productivity losses (physiological stress) due to temperature increase • change in water availability (may increase or decrease, according to region) • change in water availability (may increase or decrease, according to region) • increased frequency of extreme weather events (impact less acute than for extensive system) Indirect impacts Agro-ecological changes and ecosystem shifts leading to: • alteration in fodder quality and quantity • change in host-pathogen interaction resulting in an increased incidence of emerging diseases • disease epidemics • increased resource prices (e.g. feed, water and energy) • disease epidemics • increased cost of animal housing (e.g. cooling systems) Overview of emissions The livestock sector is a major contributor to climate change, generating significant emissions of carbon diox- ide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N20). Livestock contribute to climate change by emitting GHGs ei- ther directly (e.g. from enteric fermentation and manure management) or indirectly (e.g. from feed-production activities, conversion of forest into pasture). Based on a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), it is estimated that the sector emits about 7.1 gigatonnes of CO2 equivalent (CO2 eqv.), about 18 percent of the total anthropogenic GHG emissions (FAO, 2006a).

Along the animal food chain, the major sources of emissions are (FAO, 2006a): • Land use and land-use change: 2.5 gigatonnes of CO2 eqv. (36 percent of the sector’s emissions); including for- est and other natural vegetation replaced by pasture and feed crops in the neotropics (CO2) and carbon release from soils, such as pasture and arable land dedicated to feed production (CO2). • Feed production (except carbon released from soil): 0.4 gigatonnes CO2 eqv. (6 percent of the sector’s emis- sions), including fossil fuels used in manufacturing chemical fertilizer for feed crops (CO2) and chemical ferti- lizer application on feed crops and leguminous feed crop (N2O, and ammonia [NH3]). • Animal production: 1.9 gigatonnes CO2 eqv. (27 percent of the sector’s emissions), including enteric fermenta- tion from ruminants (CH4) and on-farm fossil fuel use (CO2). • Manure management: 2.2 gigatonnes CO2 eqv. (31 percent of the sector’s emissions), mainly through manure storage, application and deposition (CH4, N2O, NH3). • Processing and international transport: 0.03 gigatonnes CO2 eqv. (less than 0.1 percent of the sector’s emissions).

There are striking differences in global emission intensities among commodities. For example, on a global scale, the emission intensity of meat and milk, measured by output weight, corresponds on average to 46.2 kg CO2 eqv. per kg of carcass weight (CW), 6.1 kg CO2 eqv./kg CW and 5.4 kg CO2 eqv./kg CW for beef, pork and chicken meat1, respectively, and 2.8 kg CO2 eqv./kg of milk (FAO, 2013a and b, forthcoming). There is significant variability in emissions across the different regions. For example, the FAO LCA of GHG emissions from the global dairy sector, found emissions per unit of milk products varied greatly among different regions. Emis- sions from Europe and North America range between 1.6 and 1.9 kg CO2 eqv. per kg fat and protein corrected milk (FPCM) at the farm gate. The highest emissions are estimated for sub-Saharan Africa with an average of 9.0 kg CO2 eqv./kg FPCM at the farm gate. GHG emissions for Latin America and the Caribbean, Near East and North Africa and South Asia, range between 3 and 5 kg CO2 eqv./kg FPCM at the farm gate. The global average is estimated at 2.8 kg CO2 eqv. (FAO, 2013a). Results from the same study of the global dairy sector also found 1 Emission intensity estimates for beef, chicken meat and pork are based on FAO’s recent work on the LCA of GHG emissions from the livestock sector (FAO 2013a and b, forthcoming).