--- Multihazard assessment for DRR in Bicol Region, Philippines ---

421
MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience
In the Bicol region of the Philippines local-level planning for DRR was based on the use of a multi-hazard as-
sessment that identified the threats to agriculture and the farming practices that made farmers more vulner-
able to natural hazards. It was instrumental in the selection of the most appropriate DRR technologies and
practices.
The value of risk assessments is well recognized. A number of countries have institutionalized the use of risk
assessments as the basis for planning risk reduction strategies. For instance, South Africa’s policy framework
on disaster risk management underscores the importance of disaster risk assessments as a guide for na-
tional, provincial and municipal DRR efforts. All national government bodies are required to carry out disaster
risk assessments to identify priority disaster risks relevant to their work. They are also committed to develop-
ing “a national standard for conducting comprehensive disaster risk assessments, including guidelines for the
application of a uniform disaster risk assessment methodology and approach, as well as the standardization
of reporting formats for disaster risk assessments” (NDMC, 2005). The disaster management model in Bang-
ladesh, illustrated in Box 15.2 below, is another good example of an institutionalized risk assessment model.
Box 15.1
Multihazard assessment for DRR in Bicol Region, Philippines
In a DRR project implemented by FAO in the Bicol region, a situation assessment was carried out in pilot areas as a
starting point to evaluate a variety of factors, including: the physical and environmental context and local hazards; the
socio-economic conditions, livelihoods and agricultural land use; the existing vulnerabilities of vulnerable groups,
their capacity and coping strategies and their existing agricultural practices (e.g. crops, livestock, fisheries, forestry,
homestead); and the local institutional disaster risk management systems.
The multi-hazard assessment identified eight types of threats to agriculture, including geological and climate-
related hazards, and assessed the level of risk and impact of each. In the diagram below, when the intensity level
goes up, the further from the centre, the greater is the hazard and its impact on the elements at risk.
Figure 15.3
Threats to agriculture

Figure 15.4
Farming practices resulting in
vulnerability to hazards
Strong Wind
Drought
Landslide
Ash Fall
Soil Erosion
Lahar Flow
Volcanic
Eruptions
Plant Pest
Solo
farming
system
4%
Lack of
alternative
livelihood
8%
Poor
irrigation
water use
management
6%
Practice
of rice
straw
burning
4%
Use of
commercial
fertilizer
without soil
analysis
17%
Use of hybrid
variaties
4%
Use of
inappropriate
varieties
6%
Constant use of
single variety
17%
Wrong timing
of planting
18%
Absence of
seed source
for saline
prone areas
6%
Low irrigation
maintenance
system
10%

In addition to the types of threats to agriculture, the assessment in Bicol identified farming practices that made
farmers more vulnerable to hazards, such as the use of inappropriate crop varieties or incorrect timing for planting.
Source: Republic of the Philippines Department of Agriculture and FAO, 2010