--- Source: adapted from UNISDR, 2009b ---

440 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK scale up CSA. Knowledge sharing can be a vital strategy for CSA to gain scale given the wealth of proven DRR practices across most countries. By making use of technologies and practices that support both risk reduction and climate change adaptation, CSA can provide win-win benefits for farmers.

At the national and regional levels, well-established legislations, institutional structures, policies and plans for DRR provide CSA with a strong supportive enabling environment. By working in partnership with the national institutional architecture of DRR and climate change adaptation, CSA can act as a unifying force within agricul- ture line agencies. In this way, integrated and coherent plans for CSA can be articulated based on existing DRR and climate change adaptation policies and strategies.

Developing strategic frameworks to guide action on and investment in CSA at the country level will require mapping the national institutional landscape, policies and plans that can enable and catalyse CSA. This will be a challenging process, given the wide array of disciplines, actors and frameworks that are relevant to CSA and the complex relationships among them. Unquestionably, the mapping exercise should include DRR policies and practices relevant to livelihoods and food security. Table 15.1 presents suggestions for harnessing exist- ing DRR capacities to help reach CSA objectives. The table draws on the examples given in this module and on experience elsewhere.

Table 15.1 Strategic entry areas in risk reduction for CSA and integration opportunities with climate change adaptation Enabling Environment Practical Tools Knowledge Sharing Work with existing national platforms and institutional mechanisms for coordinating disaster risk reduction and adaptation.

Promote multistakeholder dialogue to identify opportunities and partnerships between the DRR and climate change adaptation communities, jointly address gaps and harmonize plans for CSA.

Take stock of and build coherence with national policies and plans already developed for reducing disaster risk and for adaptation in the country, including those that may be hazard-specific, such as drought mitigation policies.

Conduct integrated analysis of multiple risks to agriculture and food security, based on the collection of available information (data and maps) on hazards, vulnerabilities and risk assessments.

Enhance tools that blend risk assessments of current risks and downscaled climate change scenarios for improved and more holistic analysis.

Design CSA project initiatives that integrate adaptation and risk reduction measures, and that are in line with national DRR and climate change adaptation goals.

Implement CSA locally through integrated DRR and climate change adaptation community-based approaches that combine immediate short-term measures to reduce risks with long-term adaptation measures to slow- onset climate change.

Take stock of and promote proven traditional local knowledge.

Map and promote DRR technologies and practices that have been effective in reducing disaster risks to help meet the objectives of CSA.

Promote knowledge sharing among farmers, practitioners and policy makers on effective DRR and climate change adaptation technologies.

Support generation of integrated knowledge and practice.

Support stronger engagement of the DRR community.

Source: adapted from UNISDR, 2009b The need for increasing the scale of CSA activities is becoming more urgent due to the pace of climate change.

Southern Africa, for example, will be heavily affected by climate change with projections that indicate tem- perature increases of up to six degrees Celsius and a decrease in rainfall by as much as 40 percent in some parts of the region over the next 70 years. CSA offers fresh opportunities to improve food security. Those work- ing to advance CSA should make DRR a core element, harvest the wealth of good practice in DRR and forge strong partnerships with established institutional arrangements. Building on the accumulated expertise in