--- As a contribution to addressing this gap, FAO’s Mitigation of Climate Change in Agriculture Programme (MICCA) ---

482 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Below, three key strategies for knowledge sharing and effective learning will be discussed: the potential of agricultural innovation systems; the use of ICTs and ComDev approaches for improving access to information; and the role of knowledge networks.

Strengthening agricultural innovations systems to harness the innovation potential needed for CSA As part of a broader capacity development approach, agricultural innovation systems with public and private research as well as extension and advisory services play a key role in supporting the transition towards CSA by documenting, generating, blending and sharing indigenous and scientific knowledge. Such services facilitate learning processes as well as network-based development and innovation. Knowledge networks and plat- forms provide a venue in which the various actors can connect. They take diverse forms depending on their tar- get group, for example global or regional platforms for coordination, knowledge exchange or advocacy are very different from field support platforms. Aggregation—through farmer unions, cooperatives or value chains—is a key strategy to minimize transaction costs and upscale CD for CSA. Moreover, the roles, responsibilities and capabilities of both men and women need to be well understood to ensure that both men and women benefit from innovation systems supporting the transition to CSA (see Box 17.5) calling for methodologies and ap- proaches for gender sensitive research as well as extension and advisory services on CSA.

Box 17.5 Developing capacity to understand and address the gender dimensions of climate change and agriculture Context A gender-sensitive approach is crucial to achieve CSA. However, little research has been undertaken to understand how men and women are adapting to climate change, mitigating emissions and maintaining food security.

Methodologies and approaches for research and development planning are needed.

Methodology As a contribution to addressing this gap, FAO’s Mitigation of Climate Change in Agriculture Programme (MICCA) partnered with the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) to develop training material on “Gender and Climate Change Research in Agriculture and Food Security for Rural Development”.

The objectives of the training material were to: sensitize users to the links between socio-economic and gender issues in the context of climate change in the agriculture and food security sectors; develop the capacity of users to utilize Participatory Action Research (PAR) tools in gathering socio-economic and gender-sensitive information for climate change research and development; help users understand how to analyse field research outputs in a field research setting; apply knowledge gained beyond research to promote gender-sensitive adaptation and mitigation activities in agriculture.

The guide focuses on action research in three areas: (1) the use of climate analogues to assess the possibility of farmer to farmer exchanges; (2) equitable access and use of weather information to minimize risk; and (3) catalyzing CSA.

Drawing on the network of CCAFS research sites, six researchers – two each from Bangladesh, Ghana and Uganda – were trained at FAO, Rome, to test the training materials in their home countries. The testing was followed by a debriefing workshop at which the training materials and research outcomes were discussed. The training material was subsequently revised and disseminated.

Outcomes The process of field testing and revising the training material was found to be a critical component of developing training documents that are user-friendly and designing research methods that can be carried out under a variety of circumstances. Engaging researchers from different countries enriched the process by involving a variety of perspectives and experiences. In addition, involving researchers in the process of developing the training material was an opportunity to develop their individual capacity to train and disseminate the research methods.

The materials and methods are now being used by CCAFS’ scientists to conduct research in CCAFS sites. They will serve to mainstream gender into research and analyses on agriculture and climate change.

The training material is available online at FAO, 2012c Working papers based on the findings from the field testing are available at FAO, 2012d