--- Source: IFC, 2012; PwC, 2012 ---

529 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation to use country-led systems. To make these national systems effective there is a need to strengthen human and institutional capacity through training and capacity development in the area of data collection, assessments, monitoring and evaluation for CSA (discussed in detail in Module 17 on capacity development).

In addition, monitoring and evaluation often have considerable transaction costs. Unless appreciated as a use- ful tool by stakeholders, monitoring and evaluation can be seen as a burden that offers little value for the effort involved in gathering an excessive amount of information.

Practicality of methods and tools There is limited choice for appropriate analytical methods to address the specific needs and conditions of CSA projects for assessment, monitoring and evaluation. However, there is a considerable body of experience from natural resources management and rural development projects from which monitoring and evaluation activi- ties can build upon (see Annex 18.1 on range of tools and good practices in their application).

Many of the existing tools and models are intended for highly skilled technical experts in academic institutions and may not be suited for the purposes of implementing CSA in developing countries. Further collaboration and communication between the developers of the tools and their users are necessary to ensure that simple tools that meet the needs of CSA practitioners are available. Some tools may be less sophisticated and produce less detailed scientific results but still successfully meet the needs of the CSA community. It is necessary to find the right balance between the simplicity of the tools and the reliability of the results. 18.6 Examples of assessment, monitoring and evaluation In this section three case studies are presented to illustrate assessment, monitoring and evaluation in different contexts.

Box 18.11 MRV for Kenya agricultural carbon project Vi Agroforestry (Vi-skogen) is a Swedish development cooperation organization that works with farmers in the Lake Victoria Basin in Eastern Africa. The carbon project, which targets 60 000 smallholder farmers in 45 000 hectares in Western Kenya, plans to generate verified emission reductions through sustainable agricultural land management practices. Measurement, reporting and verification require direct, activity-based measurements that include estimates of tree carbon (measurements of diameter at breast height and allometric growth functions) and soil carbon (modelling with crop yields and land management practices data). Every year, all project participants collect core datasets. In addition, a sample of 200 farmers collect more intensive data. GPS units are used to measure farm plot size and location, but the majority of the data are collected manually with pencil and paper. The project maintains two data management systems with datasets on livelihoods and carbon. The database automatically checks the quality of manually entered data and calculates mitigation impacts. The carbon accounting methodology has been approved by the Verified Carbon Standard and is in the public domain. The project is working to develop a cost-effective way of monitoring emission reductions that minimizes transaction costs and maximizes benefits to farmers.

Source: IFC, 2012; PwC, 2012