--- Practical Action, 2010). ---

427 MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience 15.4 Scaling up proven technologies and practices for resilient livelihoods Building on and expanding DRR knowledge and practice in agriculture CSA promotes the application of proven practices and approaches and recognizes the need for increased scale.

Knowledge and practice gained from DRR offers a resource pool from which to draw proven approaches and technologies that are effective in building resilient livelihoods.

Research has shown that indigenous peoples cultivate an enormous diversity of traditional crop varieties using a variety of effective traditional practices (IIED, 2011a). Five elements of traditional knowledge systems can be useful for climate change adaptation in agriculture (IIED, 2011b): 1.resilient properties (resilient crop species and varieties for adaptation); 2.plant breeding (conservation of local landraces and seed selection for preferred and adaptive characteristics); 3.wild crop relatives (crop improvement and domestication as well as to supplement diets); 4.farming practices (water, soil or pest management, erosion control and land restoration); and 5.climate forecasting (traditional knowledge for forecasting weather and predicting extreme events).

In many societies, resilience has been a natural, evolving process for absorbing shocks and adjusting to chang- es that impact people’s livelihoods (Pandey et al., 2003). Numerous case studies on indigenous knowledge of risk reduction have been documented1. For instance, in many regions of the world, a diversity of rainwater harvesting and management practices has evolved over millennia to cope with climate variability, particularly drought. In South Asia, rainwater harvesting dates back over 8 000 years. In India alone, more than 1.5 million traditional village tanks, ponds and earthen embankments harvest rainwater in 660 000 villages across the country (Pandey et al., 2003; IUCN, 2008).

In the Andes, mixed farming systems, agricultural diversity and crop biodiversity have evolved over time as farmers adjusted to shifting environmental conditions (see also Module 6 on genetic resources). For gen- erations, local farmers have domesticated, improved and conserved traditional crop species and varieties. In Peru, where about 4 000 varieties of potatoes are grown, the conservation and cultivation of a rich diversity of potatoes is well recognized as an effective traditional technology for reducing the risk of loss and for protect- ing against pests and diseases. Farmers identify the varieties that have the capacity to resist drought, cold temperatures or frost. Planting in a diversity of altitudes and terrains also contributes to the conservation of potato varieties and helps to ensure that crops survive in some locations even when they fail in others (EC and Practical Action, 2010).

In the rangelands of the Horn of Africa, pastoralism emerged thousands of years ago and has evolved and adjusted as a response to weather uncertainty. It is a resilient livelihood mechanism for coping with the harsh environment of arid and semi-arid lands and optimizing the use of its natural resources. It allows rural communities to manage risk and conserve their resource base (WISP et al., 2009; HPG, 2009b). “Pastoralism is highly compatible with conservation and makes the most of livestock production opportunities within vari- able and unpredictable rangeland ecosystems. Pastoral strategies of herd diversity, flexibility and mobility are rational and crucial for survival in risk prone environments and are based on the need to respond rapidly to changing climatic and vegetative conditions” (WISP et al., 2007) (see also Module 8 on climate-smart live- stock).

Government investments in DRR, which have increased over the past several decades, can provide exam- ples of effective practices that can be replicated. In India, the government has adopted a number of national programmes for reducing the impact of drought, including: the 1973 Drought Prone Areas Programme; the 1 See for example SAARC Disaster Management Center, 2008 and UNISDR et al., 2008.