--- Can biofuels contribute to CSA? ---

153
MODULE 5: Sound Management of Energy for CSA
Synergies and trade-offs between energy-smart food and climate-smart
agriculture
As there are numerous synergies between CSA and energy-smart food, climate benefits can and do often ac-
crue through the development of energy-smart food systems. However combining these objectives may also
require some trade-offs. Table 5.3 presents examples of such potential synergies and trade-offs. It should be
noted that this table presents a very broad picture and should be considered as a first approximation for sum-
marizing the possible linkages between energy-smart food systems and CSA. These linkages are often quite
complex and context specific, and as such, more research is needed in this area.
Box 5.3
Can biofuels contribute to CSA?
Global liquid biofuel production has increased more than 500 percent since 2000. Production is projected to increase
a further 50 percent by 2020 and increase even more by 2050.
Over the past five or six years policies have played a critical role in the rapid increase in liquid biofuel production,
principally for transport purposes. Policy support for biofuels has been motivated by a desire to strengthen energy
security, reduce GHG emissions, advance rural development and increase farmers’ incomes. After the rapid introduction
of new and expanded support measures, there is now a better evidence base for reviewing the impacts of increased
biofuel production and reflecting on how policies might be adjusted to address changing goals and concerns.
Listed below are some possible contributions of biofuels to CSA objectives.
• Biofuels (in solid, liquid and gaseous forms) can help improve access to modern energy services for household and
productive uses, which contribute to sustainable increases in productivity and income. A recent study on small-scale
bioenergy initiatives (FAO, 2009) shows that this improvement can be achieved with minimum sustainability risks.
• Biofuels, especially small-scale production, can strengthen resilience to climate change and variability. However,
they may also bring about their own climate risks by creating a link between energy security and crop yields.
This risk is particularly high where feedstock diversity is low.
• The impacts on GHG emissions and carbon sequestration are more complex and the subject of much debate.
Bioenergy is often considered to be CO2-neutral because the generation of biomass by photosynthesis absorbs
the same amount of CO2 that is released by burning the biomass. However, this fails to consider the linkage
between the carbon cycle and other natural cycles, including those of nitrogen, phosphorus and water. These
elements are also required for photosynthesis and they are consumed whenever biomass is produced. Soil
nutrients are consumed and need to be supplemented. These additions (e.g. fertilizer application) can result
in GHG emissions, especially nitrous oxide. A full life cycle assessment has to be carried out that can take into
account agricultural production and processing, as well as direct and indirect land-use changes.
• Some good practices that can improve the performance of biofuels in terms of climate change mitigation include:
-- agroecological zoning, to avoid biofuel development in high carbon areas (e.g. primary forests, peat land)
and only promote it in areas of high land suitability;
-- the use of residues for biofuel production, as long as it does not affect their use for soil management or as
animal feed; and
-- conservation agriculture, which is usually a low-carbon farming practice that can sometimes even sequester
carbon.

More broadly, biofuel policies and programmes should act in synergy with programmes related to agricultural
development rather than with policies that artificially support biofuel demand. A sound and integrated approach to
bioenergy, particularly biofuel development, is required to reduce the risks and harness the opportunities related to
bioenergy development. This approach requires:
• an in-depth understanding of the situation and the related opportunities and risks, as well as synergies and
trade-offs;
• an enabling policy and institutional environment, with sound and flexible policies (e.g. targets and incentives)
and means to implement these;
• implementation of good practices by investors and producers to reduce risks and increase opportunities, along
with appropriate policy instruments to promote these good practices;
• proper impact monitoring and evaluation and policy response mechanisms; and
• capacity building and good governance in the implementation of the above.

To promote this sound and integrated approach, FAO has been developing a set of instruments which are part of
FAO’s Sustainable Bioenergy Toolkit: Making Bioenergy Work for Climate, Energy and Food Security (FAO, 2013).