--- Page 512 ---

499 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation The overall goal of the outlined assessments and monitoring and evaluation activities is to effectively guide the transition to CSA. Climate change is likely to hit hardest those who already are the most vulnerable and food insecure. Consequently assessments, monitoring and evaluation must pay particular attention to these vulnerable groups.

Different types of assessment, monitoring and evaluation are summarized in Table 18.1.

Table 18.1 Typology of assessment, monitoring and evaluation for CSA 1. Assessments (for policy and project design) 2. Monitoring and evaluation 1.1 Climate impact assessment (assessments of key changes in climate, climate change impact on agriculture, and vulnerability of livelihoods for strategic planning) At conceptualization stage Monitoring and evaluation (to measure progress and identify successes and problems of CSA interventions) Through the project cycle (implementation and evaluation stages) 1.2 CSA options assessment (assessments of CSA options’ effectiveness to achieve adaptation, mitigation, food security and development to identify best options) At preparation stage The terms in the table are used throughout the module. Assessments for policy and project design may be referred to as simply assessments where no confusion is expected. In the rest of Section 18.2 conceptual frameworks for assessments, monitoring and evaluation are explained in detail.

Assessments for CSA policy and project design There are a number of potential practices that would improve productivity of local agricultural systems, en- hance food security and support livelihoods. Implementing CSA is a very context- and location-specific pro- cess, and there are no good practices that are applicable to all situations. A careful strategic assessment needs to be made within a policy and programme to evaluate the benefits and tradeoffs in various social, economic and environmental conditions. Assessments can determine how local climate conditions and their impact on agriculture, food security, and livelihoods have been changing and are projected to change in the future. They can also determine whether certain measures are climate-smart or not in a particular context.

Good CSA interventions may differ from those undertaken in more traditional agricultural development and natural resources management.

Without proper assessments it is difficult to explain why a transition to CSA is necessary and which CSA activi- ties can achieve desired targets (e.g. increased incomes despite high vulnerability to an increasing number of droughts). Knowing which crops or livelihood activities may be more sensitive to changing climate, for ex- ample, will help practitioners choose more resilient crops and adopt more diversified livelihoods. Informing stakeholders of the changing amounts of rainfall and the spatial distribution of precipitation will help them to better allocate resources for the management of water resources.

Assessments for policy and project design identify the impact of climate change and climate variability on the agricultural sector, food security and livelihoods. Climate impact assessments characterize the effects of climate change and identify the most vulnerable locations and contexts that require adaptation actions. Cli- mate impact assessments are typically conducted at the project’s conceptualization stage, but they are also used to inform policy directly (Figure 18.1), a type of strategic planning. The main elements of climate impact assessment are: an assessment of changes in climate (historical, current, and projected future); an assess- ment of impacts of climate on agriculture; and an assessment of the vulnerability of livelihoods, including food security, to climate change. The relationship between climate and agriculture now and in the past can be