--- Page 168 ---

155 MODULE 5: Sound Management of Energy for CSA CSA objectives Sustainable increases in productivity and income Strengthened resilience to climate change and variability Agriculture’s reduced impact on climate change Energy-smart food objectives Increased production and use of renewable energy in agrifood systems, including through integrated food-energy systems)* ?

General:

On-farm production of renewable energy can allow farmers to sustainably increase income through the sale of renewable energy to the grid or of biogas to the local market or through reduced purchases of fossil fuels.

Potential land-use competition (energy versus food: e.g. solar panels on farm land, biofuels) Use of renewable energy systems may result in more expensive energy inputs (i.e. fossil fuel might be cheaper than renewable energy) Specific:

On-farm production of biogas can allow use of a biogas by-product as a liquid fertilizer, which can increase yields and reduce environmental pollution.

Integrated food-energy systems such as intercropping with leguminous crops or agroforestry may sustainably increase farm productivity and also provide energy.

Excessive use of agriculture and forestry residues for bioenergy can compete with their role in increasing soil organic matter and hence damage productivity.

Biofuel production could lead to increased pressure on water resources, reduced agrobiodiversity (where monoculture is used) and introduction of invasive species. þ?

General:

Renewable energy will lead to decreased dependence on fossil fuels, so less vulnerability to fossil fuel market shocks.

On-farm renewable energy production can Increase income diversification, so reducing dependency on crop yields and demand.

Carefully-designed diversified energy portfolio can reduce climate vulnerability, but some types of renewable energy (e.g. wind, bioenergy, hydro) are vulnerable to climate variability.

The degree to which new energy services are climate resilient depends on the energy source (see table 5.1).

Specific:

Excessive use of agriculture and forestry residues for bioenergy can compete with their role in improving soil management, which could decrease resilience to extreme weather events.

The use of residues for bioenergy rather than animal feed and/or soil conditioner could result in decreased soil quality. þ General:

Energy diversification will tend to replace fossil fuels with renewable forms of energy, but in the case of bioenergy, will only reduce net GHG emissions subject to use of good practices.

Specific:

Excessive use of agriculture and forestry residues for bioenergy can compete with their role in returning carbon to the soil; different bioenergy technologies lead to different levels of nutrient availability in the soil.

Indirect effects of biofuel demand such as indirect land-use change and price-induced intensification can lead to net GHG increases.

The use of residues for bioenergy rather than for animal feed could act as an additional source of displacement and potential land-use change * Integrated food-energy systems can be used to increase access to modern energy services (the third pillar of energy-smart food) as well as to increase production and use of renewable energy in agrifood systems (the second pillar) (Bogdanski et al., 2010; Bogdanski, 2012).