--- Nitrogen - Fixation ---

110 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Figure 4.2 Provision of ecosystem services and functions by soils Life support services • The soil renews, retains, and delivers plant nutrients and provides physical support to plants. • It sustains biological activity, diversity and productivity. • The soil ecosystem provides habitat for the dispersion and dissemination of seeds, which ensures the continued evolution of the gene pool.

Provision services • Soil is the basis for the provision of food, fibre, fuel and medicinal products that sustain life. • It holds and releases water for plant growth and water supply.

Regulating services • The soil plays a central role in buffering, filtering and moderating the hydrological cycle. • Soils regulate the carbon, oxygen and plant nutrient cycles (e.g. nitrogen, potassium, phosphorus, calcium, magnesium and sulphur) that affect plant production and the climate. • Soil biodiversity contributes to regulating soil pests and diseases.

Soil micro-organisms process and break down wastes and dead organic matter (e.g. manure, remains of plants, fertilizers and pesticides) preventing them from building up to toxic levels and entering the water supply as pollutants.

Cultural services • Soil provides the foundation for urban settlement and infrastructure. • Soils and their wider ecosystems provide spiritual or heritage value. • Soils are the basis for landscapes that provide recreation.

Soil health is a function of its capacity to provide the basic services for supporting plant growth and contributing to the regulation of nutrient, water, carbon and gaseous cycles. Soil health is widely linked to soil biodiversity.

Soil organisms mechanically (comminution) and chemically (mineralization) break down the organic matter so they can use it as food. Excess nutrients are released into the soil and used by plants. The recalcitrant (indi- gestible) fraction of the organic matter is reorganized into SOM, which is less decomposable than the original plant and animal material (Figure 4.3). In turn, SOM content, especially the more stable humus, increases the soil’s capacity to store water and sequester carbon from the atmosphere (Bot and Benites, 2005).

Figure 4.3 Organic matter turnover Carbon dioxide Crop residues Fertilizers Nitrogen - Fixation Nutrient Mineralization Microbial Biomass Available Organic matter Resistant Organic matter Source: Gupta et al., 1997 ©Vargas, 2012