--- forage diets developed in Cambodia, Viet Nam, and the Lao People’s Republic. ---

161 MODULE 5: Sound Management of Energy for CSA Box 5.4.

An integrated food-energy system in Colombia TOSOLY Farm in the Colombian foothills north of Bogotá, is a highly integrated farm that produces food and energy for family consumption and for sale in a crop and livestock system. The cropping is based on sugar cane (feed for pigs, food and energy), coffee and cocoa (food and energy), and multipurpose trees. Sugar cane is cultivated on 1.5 ha of the seven ha farm. Tree crops include coffee, cocoa, forage trees and forage plants for timber and fuel, including for shading the coffee.

The livestock and fuel components are chosen for their capacity to utilize the crops and by-products produced on the farm. The sugar cane stalk is fractionated into juice and residual bagasse. The tops, including the growing point and some whole stalk, are the basal diet for cattle and goats. The juice is the energy feed for pigs and the source of ‘sweetener’ for the farm family’s cooking. The bagasse is the fuel source for a gasifier that provides combustible gas for an internal combustion engine linked to an electric generator. The goats are the means of fractionating the forage trees, consuming the leaves, fine stems and bark as sources of protein. The residual stems are an additional source of fuel in the gasifier. The goat unit has ten breeding does and two bucks. There are three pens for two crossbred cows and their calves, which are kept for the production of milk, meat and manure.

The pig unit has a capacity for 40 growing pigs and five sows. Forty hens and six ducks are raised for eggs and meat in foraging, semi-confined systems. Rabbit production, a new venture on the farm, applies the principles of 100 percent forage diets developed in Cambodia, Viet Nam, and the Lao People’s Republic.

A horse transports sugarcane and forages. All high-moisture wastes are recycled through plug-flow, tubular plastic (Polyethylene) biodigesters. Pig and human excreta are the feedstock for four biodigesters. Waste water from coffee pulping, washing of dishes and clothes go to a fifth biodigester. Effluents from all eight biodigesters are combined and recycled to the crops as fertilizer. The pens for the goats and cattle have clay floors covered with a layer of bagasse to absorb the excreta. Periodically, this manure is applied to the crops as fertilizer and a source of organic matter.

Most of the energy on the farm (about 100 kilowatt hours per day [kWh/day]) is produced by gasification of the sugarcane bagasse and the stems from the mulberry and Tithonia forages. The 800 W installed capacity of photovoltaic panels are estimated to yield 8 kWh daily. The eight biodigesters produce 6m3 daily of biogas, two-thirds of which are converted to electricity (6 kWh/day) using it as fuel in the same internal combustion motor generator attached to the gasifier. The remainder is employed for cooking. Low-grade heat energy produced by the solar water heater and the wood stove are not included in the energy balance.

After deducting the electricity used to drive the farm machinery and to supply the house (11 kWh/day), the potentially exportable surplus is 104 kWh daily. At the current price of electricity (US$0.20/kWh), this would yield an annual return of US$7 600. Annually, the gasifier produces 4.4 tonnes of biochar, which is returned to the soil. Assuming that 65 percent of carbon in the biochar is not oxidized in the soil (Lehmann, 2007), then the effective sequestration of carbon dioxide is in the order of 11 tonnes annually.

Source: Preston, 2010