--- Case Study 18.1 ---

530 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case Study 18.1 Analysis of climate impacts on food security and livelihoods Descriptive analysis of baseline vulnerability to climate risks WFP is working with partners such as the UK Met Office Hadley Centre, the International Research Institute for Climate and Society, and the Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security Research Theme of CGIAR (CCAFS), to develop a series of tools, methods, and services to better understand climate impacts on food security and livelihoods. The analytical methods have been tested in Ethiopia, Mali, Nepal and Senegal.

The methods include a descriptive analysis to establish a baseline against which spatial vulnerability to climate-related risks can be assessed. The aim of this component of the analysis is to identify the potential vulnerabilities of food security to climate variability through tailor-made, user-oriented outputs that can help prioritize interventions for the most vulnerable groups.

The data for the baseline vulnerability analysis are mainly taken from household surveys, such as the Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis or the Living Standards Surveys. For the descriptive assessment, the relevant climate-sensitive variables are identified in survey data (e.g. questionnaires, secondary data and livelihood profiles).

The parameters are then selected, and their specific vulnerabilities to climate variables are described. This assessment provides information for identifying the spatial patterns of vulnerability and the factors that make regions and districts vulnerable.

Through this method, it is possible to determine the sources of food or income and then pinpoint the proportion of these factors that are climate-sensitive according to geographical region. Other vulnerability-related data, such as the consumption score, which illustrates the status of food security, and the coping strategy index, which quantifies the use of coping mechanisms during shocks (e.g. lowering food rations, lowering food quality, selling assets and migration) can also be quantified and plotted at the subnational level to identify who is the most vulnerable and prioritize interventions to support these communities.

Temporal analysis of relationships between climate and food security To complement the baseline assessment, long-term climate and food security data are also analysed. Through this analysis, it is possible to measure the impact of current and historical climate variability on food security indicators, such as crop and livestock production and food prices.

To evaluate the relationships between the time series for food security indicators and climate, the data are de-trended based on a first-difference time series (i.e. the differences in value from one year to the next). This method has been used in other studies to minimize the influence of gradual inter-annual changes associated with changes in crop management (e.g. Lobell and Field, 2007). Correlations between food security indicators (e.g. yield, food prices and livestock products) and climate variables (e.g. precipitation and temperature) are evaluated through regression analysis. A linear regression is calculated to identify the most relevant climate parameter for each crop in the different districts. Regression analyses help to identify the relative contribution of climate parameters on changes in food security indicators.

As an example, precipitation and yield correlations for the period 1965-2005 are illustrated in the figure below for Nepal.