--- Source: FAO, 2011a; IPCC, 2007a ---

50 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Successful integration of biodiversity conservation into agricultural production is fundamental to main- tain functioning ecosystems. For this reason, protected areas are important tools in many landscape and ecosystem approaches. However, establishing protected areas is often not feasible, especially in densely populated areas.

Mitigation co-benefits Many agricultural and land management systems and practices (e.g. sustainable land management, agrofor- estry and integrated food-energy systems) are climate smart. They increase the carbon content of the soils and aboveground biomass and enhance productivity and resilience. Mitigation co-benefits can be enhanced through integrated landscape management by seizing mitigation opportunities of any particular landscape through increased biomass production.

Sustainably increasing or intensifying productivity offers important opportunities for mitigating climate change by decreasing deforestation, rehabilitating eroded soils and reducing pressure on surrounding natural eco- systems. Similarly, holistic management of grassland ecosystems will help to regenerate degraded areas and improve vegetation cover. Grassland management can also be accompanied by the introduction of trees, which sequester carbon in the soils and biomass. Improved grazing management (management that increases pro- duction) can lead to an increase of soil carbon stocks (Conant, 2009) (more on livestock management in Module 8). If their biological processes are preserved, valuable ecosystems like wetlands and peatlands perform im- portant water regulatory services and constitute a large carbon sink (see Box 2.4). Landscape-level land-use planning strategies need to identify these kinds of key ecosystems and protect the high value of the ecosystem services they provide in their natural state. Special attention should also be paid to the management of organic soils as their emission potential is significant.

Different sectoral policies may have different goals regarding land use. Climate change mitigation policies aim at reducing emissions from all sectors including land use. Agricultural and national development policies aim at food security and economic development. At landscape level these policy goals can conflict. CSA and landscape management help to solve these conflicst by aiming at increasing productivity on cultivated areas, to relieve pressure on forests through sustainable agricultural intensification and to increase the carbon content of the landscapes (see also Module 9 on forestry). A transparent, participatory governance system is vital for arbitrating between these different goals.

Box 2.3 Climate change impacts on pollination services Pollination is an essential ecosystem service for crop production. Over 75 percent of the leading global food crops are dependent on pollination services provided by animals. The global monetary value of this service has been estimated to US$ 214 billion per year. Pollinators, especially bees, affect 35 percent of world crop production. Many pollinators and the crops that are dependent on them are sensitive to high temperatures and drought. In the tropics, most pollinators are already living close to their optimal range of temperature tolerance. Temperatures are expected to increase from 1.1-6.4 °C in the course of the 21st century. Consquently, climate change may have detrimental effects on pollination. CSA implemented on the landscape level can help protect this vital ecosystem service by building the agro-ecosystem’s resilience through the protection of the species, resources and processes that control ecosystem functioning.

Source: FAO, 2011a; IPCC, 2007a