--- average increase in income from SRI in eight countries (Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Nepal, Sri ---

199 MODULE 7: Climate-smart crop production system Biodiversity is necessary to sustain key functions of the ecosystem (its structure and process) and provide es- sential ecosystem services. It is an important regulator of agro-ecosystem functions, not only in the strictly biological sense of its impact on production, but also in satisfying a variety of needs of the farmer and society at large. In particular, biodiversity increases resilience of agro-ecosystems and is, as such, a means for reducing risk and adapting to climate change. Agro-ecosystem managers, including farmers, can build upon, enhance and manage the essential ecosystem services provided by biodiversity as a part of their efforts towards sustain- able agricultural production.

The conservation and enhancement of biodiversity in cropping systems both above and below ground (e.g. soil biodiversity – see Box 7.3), and the management of ecosystem services underpin sustainable farming practices. The composition and diversity of planned biodiversity (e.g. selected crops) influences the nature of the associated diversity (plant, animal, microbial) and consequently the delivery of ecosystem services. An ecosystem approach is also a means to integrate planned biodiversity that is maintained with the associated diversity (e.g. wild pollinators – see Box 7.4). For example, greater on-farm diversity of plants, greater soil coverage and more perennial cultivation may build resilience throughout the agro-ecosystem (e.g. resistance to noxious species).

Box 7.2 System of Rice Intensification in Afghanistan The System of Rice Intensification (SRI) is a set of farming practices developed to increase the productivity of land, water and other resources (see Annex A.4.1 in Module 4 on soils). SRI is based on the principle of developing healthy, large and deep-root systems that can better resist drought, waterlogging and rainfall variability, all of which are potential impacts of climate change. It has proved particularly beneficial to some areas worldwide as it requires only intermittent water application to create wet and dry soil conditions, instead of continuous flood irrigation. The average increase in income from SRI in eight countries (Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Viet Nam) has been shown to be around 68 percent with yield increases of 17 to 105 percent and decreases in water requirements between 24 and 50 percent (Africare et al., 2010).

Considering the better growth and performance of rice plants and subsequent increase in yields and productivity of the rice field with SRI elsewhere, in 2011 Afghanistan introduced SRI as an important practice of sustainable rice intensification to the farmers in Farmer Field Schools (FFS). With SRI, yields of up to 7 tonnes per hectare were achieved (PIPM, 2012) – double the farmers’ average yields in the area – using 50 percent less water than used in conventional rice cultivation practices in Afghanistan. It has also reduced the use of chemical fertilizers, and there has been no insect or disease infestation at all in SRI fields. The use of SRI is now being extended throughout a number of provinces in Afghanistan as one way to mitigate the effects of unreliable rainfall.

Box 7.3 Biological nitrogen fixation In agricultural systems, some types of microbes can carry out biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) as free-living organisms: heterotrophic and autotrophic bacteria and cyanobacteria. Other micro-organisms can only fix nitrogen through a symbiotic relationship with plants, mainly legume species. In agricultural areas, about 80 percent of BNF is achieved by the symbiotic association between legumes and the nodule bacteria, rhizobia. Farmers have some scope to influence BNF, through legume selection, the proportion of legume and grass seed in forage mixtures, inoculation with bacteria such as rhizobia, crop nutrition (especially nitrogen and phosphorous), weed, disease and pest controls, planting time, cropping sequence and intensity, and defoliation frequency of forage swards. However, some factors, including unfavourable temperatures and droughts, that affect BNF cannot be controlled. Also some legume species are better at fixing nitrogen than others. In perennial temperate forage legumes, red clover and lucerne can typically fix 200–400 kg of nitrogen per hectare (whole plant fixation, above and below ground).

Source: FAO, 2009a