--- Page 191 ---

178
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Genetic resources for food and agriculture will continue to represent key resources for building the resilience
of agro-ecosystems and providing suitable varieties and breeding stocks with which to adapt production to
changing conditions, in particular, changing climatic conditions. Crops, animals and other genetic resources
that the world relies on to ensure food security and nutrition will need to adapt to the impacts of climate
change. The conservation and sustainable use of a wide range of genetic diversity are fundamental in develop-
ing resilience to shocks, shortening production cycles and generating higher yields, ideally with better quality
and higher nutritional content. Breeding activities need to continue addressing a variety of factors to ensure
that genetic resources for food and agriculture are able to adapt to new production conditions.
The traits that may be important for climate change adaptation include:
• capacity to tolerate high temperatures and droughts;
• fire resistance and tolerance, especially for trees;
• resistance or tolerance to diseases and parasites;
• capacity to utilize scarce and poor quality feed and soil;
• tolerance to lower water quality, especially for aquatic organisms (e.g. lack of available oxygen, acidifica-
tion, increased or reduced salinity, increased turbidity and siltation, increased levels of pollutants);
• in livestock, capacity to range over harsh terrain in search of feed and water;
• phenotypic plasticity; and
• fecundity and fertility rates.

The nutrient contents of different varieties and breeds can vary considerably and can play a significant role in
food security and nutrition. Nutritional value should be considered in breeding activities. Commonly consumed
species and varieties are not necessarily the ones with the richest nutrient contents. For example, potato is a
predominant staple in some countries. There are over 5 000 varieties of potatoes, and nutrient contents vary
significantly among these varieties. Iron content of different varieties of potatoes ranges from 0.14 to 10.4 mil-
ligrams per 100 grams edible portion. This wide variation in iron content can lead to significant differences in
the iron nutritional status of consumers (Burlingame et al., 2009).
The use of the appropriate genetic resources for food and agriculture will help farmers, pastoralists, fisher
folk, fish farmers and forest managers to reduce their vulnerability to risks associated with climate change
(e.g. harvest losses due to pests, diseases or droughts) and improve their livelihoods.
Aquatic ecosystems and their biota account for the largest carbon and nitrogen fluxes on the planet and serve
as its largest carbon sinks (Pullin and White, 2011). In addition, the role that natural forests and tree planting
can play in mitigating climate change through carbon sequestration has been widely recognized. However, the
significance of genetic variation within species is less well appreciated. Trees can only provide mitigation ser-
vices if they are well adapted to their surroundings and have the potential to adapt to future changes. Moreover,
in the case of smallholder agro-forestry systems, trees will only become established if they provide clear liveli-
hood benefits. Current payment mechanisms to reward farmers for sequestrating carbon by growing trees are
generally inefficient and provide only limited rewards. The main reason farmers plant trees will continue to be
the desire to obtain the products and services directly provided by the trees. The genetic attributes that enable
the trees to provide these products and services are crucial (Loo et al., 2011).
Micro-organisms play an important role in the sequestration of carbon in soil organic matter. They also release
carbon in the form of carbon dioxide (CO2) when soil organic matter decomposes. Given the enormous amount
of carbon stored in the world’s soils, micro-organisms are extremely significant to climate change mitigation
(see also Module 4 on soils). Their contribution to carbon sequestration can be promoted by practices such as
amending soil with organic fertilizers, the proper management of crop residues, no-tillage agriculture, main-
taining cover crops on the soil surface, avoiding flood irrigation and carefully managing the use of fertilizers
(Beed et al., 2011).