--- MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience ---

419
MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience
there is growing probability of ‘simultaneous crises’ where different hazards occur at the same time, ‘sequen-
tial crisis’ where hazards trigger cascading disasters in a range of interlocked systems, and ‘synchronous
failures’ where different risks converge and interact (FAO, 2008a). The challenge is to ensure food security in
the face of multiple hazards and climate change.
Mapping multiple risk scenarios for sustainable planning
Understanding risk is a vital part of policy formulation, planning and decision making. The assessment of
threats to agriculture or ‘agricultural risks’ is a necessary first step in designing effective risk reduction meas-
ures for food security. Hazard, vulnerability and risk assessments or mapping are some of the practical tools
that have been developed and applied in many countries as the basis for planning appropriate DRR policies and
practices. Increasingly, they have been used in sustainable land-use planning and development investments.
Given that effective strategies can only be achieved by understanding the risks already facing farmers, these
tools can also support planning for climate change adaptation and CSA.
Hazard maps delineate the geographic areas exposed to a specific type of hazard, such as floods, earthquakes,
drought or tsunamis. Typically, they indicate the likelihood or probability of occurrence, frequency and potential
severity or magnitude. Hazard maps are based on historical data and knowledge of past events. Vulnerability
mapping identifies the elements exposed to hazards that may be adversely affected, such as populations, prop-
erty, agricultural areas, livelihoods, services, health facilities, etc. Vulnerability assessments may also include
social or economic dimensions, including livelihoods. Risk is determined through the combined analysis of
potential hazards and existing conditions of vulnerability. Hazard and risk maps can be developed at different
spatial scales to display the risk distribution across geographical areas. They can be site-specific, encompass
municipal or provincial administrative areas and other subnational landscapes, such as river basins, or they
can be national and even regional in scope.
Figure 15.1
Risk Assessment and Mapping
Hazards
Vulnerability
Risk
Used to inform:
• DRR-specific plans
• Adaptation-specific plans
• CSA strategies
• Land-use or territorial
planning
• Development
investments
• Post-disaster recovery
planning
Photo Credits:
Hazards - Republic of Nicaragua, Direccion de Hidrologia Superficial
Vulnerability - ©FAO, Thomas Hofer
Risk - ©FAO, Truls Brekke

Methodologies and tools used in hazard and risk assessment and mapping vary considerably, but some of the
most advanced follow an all-hazards, all-risks approach. Effective planning always needs to consider every
spatially relevant hazard and not limit the focus to only one hazard or threat. Mapping multiple-risk sce-
narios at different spatial scales is the key to understanding the various hazards affecting the same exposed
geographic area or landscape. This makes it possible to assess the cumulative consequences of hazards and
their potential interactions. For instance, some areas may be prone to drought during the dry season but also
to floods during the wet season. This has important implications for the design of appropriate risk reduction
and adaptation measures. Following an all-hazards, all-risks approach also reduces the likelihood that efforts
to safeguard against one type of hazard will not be lost to another hazard or increase vulnerability to other
hazards. For instance, regulations that seek to protect socio-economic investments against floods, such as