--- Source: Qun, 2011 in FAO and World Bank, 2012. ---

93 MODULE 3: Water management Adaptation at field and farm level Many farm-level adaptations will be spontaneous and will be done in response to change but not necessarily designed for climate. Others adaptations will need to be planned, often with external support. Farmers will favour more efficient irrigation technologies that reduce evaporation losses. These actions can be combined with deficit irrigation approaches to maximize productivity per volume of water applied rather than per area of land. Crop selection and changes in crop calendars will help farmers adapt to new temperatures and rainfall patterns. The use of crops or varieties with better resilience to dry spells will be preferred. (It should be noted however that there is little prospect for breakthroughs in developing ‘drought resistant’ crops in the near future.) Increased agricultural diversification, including better integration of trees, crops, fish and livestock will reduce risk and increase the resilience of farming systems. In particular, the farming and fish- ing of aquatic species that do not require extensive migrations and that have wide environmental tolerances will help aquaculture and capture fisheries adapt to new climatic conditions. Farmers will also need to adopt more systematically measures to respond to increased frequency of floods and more intensive rainfalls. A combination of erosion control actions and better drainage capacities will be needed.

Adaptation at irrigation scheme level Actions for adapting to climate change in irrigation schemes need to be considered in the overall context of irrigation modernization. Modern irrigation systems require better water allocation mechanisms, the clear transmission of alerts about water scarcity to farmers, and the adaptation of both infrastructure and manage- ment for more flexible and reliable delivery of water (FAO, 2007). Intermediate storage within the irrigation scheme and, where possible, access to groundwater are part of the options for building the resilience and reliability of water supply and must be considered in adaptation plans for irrigation schemes. Water pricing and the establishment of water markets are often advocated as demand management tools for promoting better water use and reducing water wastage. While these options have proven effective in some places, they are often difficult to apply for a combination of technical, institutional and policy reasons. There are other options, such as limiting seasonal allocations to users or to groups of users, that may be simpler and more effective for inducing more productive water use behaviour. Box 3.3 provides an example of a climate change adaptation programme of irrigation in China. It illustrates how adaptation activities are closely linked to over- all irrigation modernization programmes.

Box 3.3 Adaptation to climate change in the Huang-Huai-Hai Plain of China The Huang-Huai-Hai Plain of China is critical to the country’s agricultural economy and to national food security.

Future productivity in the area is being jeopardized by higher annual temperatures and reduced rainfall, which has led to more frequent spring droughts. Combined with increasing industrial and domestic water demands, climate change will mean that less water will be available for irrigated agriculture. In 2004, a project financed by the World Bank started working with farmers and technical experts to implement water-saving measures across five provinces.

In 2006, a grant from the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) was added to mainstream adaptation activities into the project activities.

The overall aims of the project were to reverse the inefficient use of water for farming and increase farmers’ profits.

A range of irrigation-centred engineering, agronomic and management measures were implemented to improve water management in over half a million hectares and bring benefits to 1.3 million farming families. Research and demonstration activities focused on the testing of adaptation measures and advanced agriculture and water saving technologies. Experts also introduced new drought- and pest-resistant wheat varieties that were more closely matched to expected future growing conditions. New techniques were introduced through pilot programmes to better manage irrigation water and were widely adopted after farmers saw the benefits in terms of reduced irrigation costs, reduced groundwater depletion and especially increased water productivity. Critical to the project’s success was the strong coordination and partnership with leading scientific and agricultural research institutions, as well as the efforts that were made towards creating joint ownership with farmers.

Source: Qun, 2011 in FAO and World Bank, 2012.