--- Case Study 18.2 ---

532 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case Study 18.2 Drought early warning response system in Kenya with a multi-sectoral set of indicators and community-based monitoring The Kenyan Government, with support from the World Bank, has established under the Land Resource Management Projects I and II (1996-2011), a drought early warning and response system (EWRS), which has been recognized by all stakeholders as highly successful. The first phase covered ten arid districts. In the second phase, the project’s target area was extended to ten semi-arid districts. Together, the EWRS now covers about 80 percent of the country. The costs of the two projects over the 15 years of implementation has been US$ 81 million, with about US$ 20 million allocated to the EWRS.

The key characteristics of the EWRS are: • It is multi-sectoral, combining environmental, livestock and pastoral welfare indicators. -- The environmental indicators include rainfall and pasture conditions with the average distance to grazing areas as an important indicator for available grazing. -- The livestock indicators include body condition and milk production. -- The pastoral welfare indicators include: ⋅⋅livestock prices and, in particular, the grain and livestock price ratio as an important indicator for pastoral welfare (a rising ratio implies increasing stress levels); and ⋅⋅nutritional status, in particular through anthropometry measurements of children. • It is participatory and decentralized, as the system relies on community-based local monitors (12 or more per district) who are literate members of pastoralist communities. They report to a broad based District Steering Group, which in turn reports to the Kenya Food Security Group, which includes representatives of the different ministries, NGO’s and donors. To fully ensure involvement of all relevant sectors, the overall coordination is embedded in the Office of the President. • It has a clearly defined set of stages (normal, alert, alarm and emergency) with clearly defined criteria, which greatly increases the transparency and reduces the political interference in the decision-making process.

No specific evaluations are yet available for the second phase. The first phase was subject to an in-depth audit by the World Bank’s independent evaluation department. This audit reported that the early alert and response system supported by the project reduced the time between the onset of stress and response by two to three weeks. The system also helped organize response programmes to the 1999-2001 drought through aid agencies and NGOs, which saved livestock with the value of at least US$ 10 million per year. The early alert and response system is now being implemented in other countries, including Ethiopia.

Source: World Bank, 2008 Case Study 18.3 Regional silvopastoral project in Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua: monitoring of carbon sequestration and biodiversity The Regional silvopastoral project in Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua was implemented between 2002-2008 with support from the Global Environment Fund, FAO’s Livestock, Environment and Development Initiative and the World Bank. The total project costs came to US$ 8.7 million. The programme’s main thrust is to convert degraded pastures by establishing silvopastoral systems (SPS) that combine fodder plants, such as grasses and leguminous herbs, with trees and shrubs. A total of 300 farmers participated in the project. The monitoring component (about US $ 1 million over a 5 year period) focused on land-use changes as a proxy for carbon sequestration and biodiversity enhancement. At the project start, a panel of experts estimated the carbon sequestration and biodiversity potential of the prevailing landscapes, and converted those into an index, on the basis of one point as the standard for carbon sequestration and biodiversity for primary forest. Carbon sequestration of secondary forest was estimated at ten tonnes of carbon per hectare. The index for each landscape was validated and later adjusted through field research that determined soil organic matter dynamics, and changes in bird, butterfly and mollusc populations.