--- Case Study 2.1 ---

58 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case Study 2.1 Pastoralism in Laikipia, Kenya ©FAO/Tony Karumba Two Maasai livestock owners Introduction The Laikipia Wildlife Forum is a 500 member organization that includes pastoralists, commercial ranchers, and small- and large-scale farmers spread over 10 000 square kilometers in the area surrounding Mt. Kenya. In 2008, the Laikipia Wildlife Forum initiated a 10-year Rangeland Rehabilitation and Management Programme, which has been implemented by Natural Capital East Africa. The Programme’s emphasis was on rehabilitating bare land across the district as part of a strategy to build the region’s resource base and reduce competition for natural resources, which has at times led to fatal conflicts over pasture and water.

The Il Ngwesi Group Ranch is approximately 200 square kilometers (20 000 hectares or 48 000 acres) of acacia grassland in northern Kenya, evenly split between the hills of the Mukugodo Forest and flat lowlands. It is jointly occupied by some 550 Maasai families, but there is movement in and out by Maasai neighbours and other groups (e.g. Somali, Turkana and Samburu).

The landscape approach The Rangeland Rehabilitation and Management Programme focuses on capacity-building (defined as ‘competence, confidence and commitment’) and makes use of two well-developed tools: planned grazing and vision setting. Planned grazing is a technical solution to land degradation while vision setting provides the human or managerial context for improved practice.

Technical demonstrations proved the value of properly managed animal herds as plant regenerators and led to community planning and the successful implementation of a grazing plan for 6 000 cattle and 3 000 sheep and goats in their dry season reserve. The plan’s most important elements involve dividing a controlled area into blocks; calculating the number of grazing days for the herds in each block based on community-informed forage assessment; and combining animals into as few herds as possible, which move through the blocks by a pre-determined sequence according to water availability, grazing competition, distance, and other factors. Most importantly, animals are gathered into tight herds as they graze