--- MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture ---

379 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture 14.1 Introduction This module addresses the issue of financing climate-smart agriculture (CSA). The first part of the module looks at how climate change affects investment needs for agricultural development to support food security, poverty reduction and economic growth. The focus of the module is on the near term – particularly the next 20 years, as this is the critical window of opportunity to transform agricultural systems to reduce the vulnerability of rural populations to climate change by improving rural livelihoods, income and welfare. Some 70 percent of the food insecure people in the world are rural and directly or indirectly dependent on agriculture for income as well as food (IFAD, 2011). People who are poor and food insecure, and who rely on agricultural production for their livelihoods are amongst the most vulnerable to climate change (HLPE, 2012). In the next 20 years, rural populations in the two areas of the world with the highest incidence of food insecurity and poverty, sub-Saha- ran Africa and South Asia, are expected to peak (IFAD, 2011). Investment to support sustainable agricultural growth in these areas is essential, as experiences have shown that the most effective means of reducing pov- erty and food insecurity amongst rural populations in agricultural-based economies is economic growth in the agricultural sector (World Bank, 2008; De Janvry and Sadoulet, 2010). Agricultural growth for food security and poverty reduction is also a key adaptation strategy by reducing vulnerability and increasing the resilience of af- fected people. Investment is the engine for such growth, but until now the levels and composition of investment have not been adequate to stimulate needed growth, particularly in those regions where it is most important.

Climate change multiplies and alters the challenges of achieving sustainable agricultural growth for food se- curity, and this has important implications for investment strategies. The necessity of adapting to and mitigat- ing climate change mandates reconsideration of growth strategies and investment priorities. Most of the mod- els assessing climate change impacts on agriculture indicate that major impacts on temperature and rainfall patterns and thus agricultural production will occur after 2050. In the intervening years, however, increased frequency and intensity of climate shocks such as drought, flooding and extreme temperatures are expected and are already occurring (IPCC, 2012). The critical importance of achieving mitigation in the near term to avoid future and larger costs of climate change compels planners to incorporate low emission considerations into large capital investment plans that have the potential to generate significant new emissions, as is the case with widespread agricultural growth strategies in developing countries.

However it is also important to consider the effects of climate change on agricultural growth and investment strategies within the larger context and challenges of sustainable agricultural development. Major drivers of change — such as rapidly evolving food systems and food markets, increasing population land ratios in rural areas and increasing resource scarcity and costs in some areas— mandate the need for different agricultural development models. Strategies have been articulated in the sustainable agricultural development and inten- sification literature, which forms an important basis for building CSA strategies and investments for specific contexts. 14.2 How does climate change affect investment needs for agriculture?

In order to understand how climate change affects agricultural investment needs in developing countries, it is necessary to first obtain an understanding of investment needs to support development and the current deficit in meeting these needs (this is referred to as the “development deficit”). This then must be complimented with an analysis of how climate change alters what is needed to achieve development – e.g. to “keep development on track” (Brooks et al., 2011). Accounting for the costs of failing to adequately adapt to climate risks is defined as the “adaptation deficit” which essentially adds to the development deficit. A final, but equally important is- sue to consider is how mitigation may affect agricultural investment requirements, and the implications for financing – e.g. a “mitigation deficit”. In this section we present information on the current state of understand- ing on these three dimensions of investment requirements for agriculture, concluding with a discussion of the overall implications for financing flows and instruments to support CSA.