--- Incentives for CSA investments ---

364 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK and traditional leaders, does not provide an incentive for local communities to manage forests sustainably.

The impact of regulations on production incentives needs to be considered. For instance, the Ukraine, an upper middle-income country, is a major global wheat producer. However, during the 2010 drought, as global wheat prices rose, there was concern that there would not be enough of this key staple available at reasonable prices to meet local demands, especially those of lower income people. In response to these concerns, Ukraine im- posed an export ban (a regulatory measure). The ban damaged Ukraine’s reputation as a reliable supplier of good quality wheat and reduced incentives for farmers to make the investments needed to increase produc- tivity. Since then, the Ukrainian government has reconsidered its policy and has initiated a social protection system targeted at low-income and vulnerable people, so that they have the means to buy food in times of high prices, while Ukrainian farmers still have incentives to increase productivity and output.

Regulations also need to be adapted to changing circumstances. Viet Nam, once a food-deficit country con- cerned with food security, still regulates rice production, requiring that rice be grown on certain areas, even though it now produces a large surplus and is a major rice exporter.

Incentives for CSA investments Incentive measures need to focus on overcoming barriers to the adoption of CSA practices. There are two main barriers to adoption. First, implementing CSA often involves upfront investments that take time to bring about gains in productivity. Second, present markets cannot accurately account for the value of the environmental benefits that CSA delivers. To reap the long-term benefits that CSA brings with regard to productivity, resil- ience and climate change mitigation, farmers and governments need to take advantage of a range of available financing sources (see also Module 14 on financing). The most successful programmes often blend different sources of funding and include a mix of policy support measures.

The Plan Vert (Green Plan) of Morocco follows an integrated approach to providing incentives for CSA. In its river basin management activities, the Plan takes account of the increasing challenges posed by water scar- city. It has a dual approach. In irrigated areas, Plan Vert provides incentives for improving water management and conservation, and integrating national value chains with international markets. In rain-fed areas, Plan Vert increases access to social services, and supports participatory natural resource management initiatives.

It also supports a programme for replacing arable crops with more drought tolerant olive trees and other tree crops. Plan Vert is implemented through a range of measures that are incorporated into policy instruments.

It also receives targeted support for specific technical innovations. Box 13.4 provides an example of a targeted support programme in Colombia and Zambia.

The valuation of ecosystem services (see Module 2 for more on ecosystem services), which measures the degree to which activities carried out in one part of an ecosystem or economic sector benefit other sectors, remains a challenge. Payment for ecosystem services is one policy instrument for providing incentives to adopt CSA. Carbon finance, which focuses on mitigation, is an important example of this approach. However, as the previous sections have highlighted, CSA also provides many other environmental services. Broadly conceived, incentives can include indirect mechanisms, such as laws and regulations, and direct incentives, such as cash subsidies and grants or non-cash subsidies, including technical assistance and other forms of support. 13.3 Improving access to knowledge and monitoring: the role of implementing actors Role of local institutions and participatory approaches CSA policies and programmes, as with any cross-sectoral development programme, need to be aligned across various levels of government. Another requirement is the widespread building of capacities because in many countries decentralization processes have not been accompanied by adequate strengthening of local level