--- UN REDD programme and the Rural Energy Enterprise Development (REED) Programme are two prominent ---

398 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK UN Agencies and Programmes UN Agencies and Programmes play a central role as implementing agencies for the activities financed through the funding channels under the UNFCCC described in the previous section. In addition, UN Agencies also provide climate financing directly, primarily through multi-donor trust funds financed by member states. The UN REDD programme and the Rural Energy Enterprise Development (REED) Programme are two prominent examples for this category of international climate finance.

The landscape approach places CSA activities in the context of the broader ecosystem highlighting interde- pendencies with surrounding land uses. In many cases, this creates a direct link between CSA and sustainable forest management. Therefore, this module includes financing options aimed at the reduction of GHG emission from deforestation and forest degradation and the enhancement of carbon stocks through forest conservation and sustainable forest management, commonly summarized as REDD+. In addition to GEF funding for SFM, the main source of financial support for corresponding activities is the UN REDD programme. The programme, a collaborative initiative of the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Pro- gramme (UNEP) and FAO, is currently financed by Denmark, Japan, Norway and Spain with funds amounting to approximately US$ 120 million. UN REDD primarily prepares countries for REDD+ activities, creating pre- requisites like MRV and monitoring systems, enhanced policy and legal frameworks, stakeholder awareness and management accountability. The UN REDD programme coordinates its activities with the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility of the World Bank (see below).

Another example for CSA relevant funding options administered directly through UN Agencies and Programmes is the REED Programme implemented by UNEP. The programme makes investments in small and mid-size enterprises dealing in clean energy solutions in rural areas, thereby following a seed capital approach instead of the more conventional grant approach. The areas covered by the recipient enterprises include clean tech- nology applications that play an integral role in CSA activities (e.g. solar crop drying and wind water pumping).

MDBs The primary function of MDBs is to provide loans under conditions and objectives based on their overall prin- ciples as well as the specific agreements between a specific country and the respective development bank.

The agricultural sector remains one of the primary target sectors of MDB loans, representing a share of the agricultural official development assistance discussed in Part 14.2 of this module. As MDBs are increasingly incorporating environmental sustainability criteria into their agricultural lending practices, their loans play an increasing role as a financing option for CSA activities.7 Among the MDBs, the European Investment Bank plays a particular role with respect to climate finance, being one of the world’s largest lenders for climate action. In 2011, European Investment Bank climate change related loans amounted to € 18 billion, approximately one third of its yearly total lending. More than € 2 billion was invested outside the European Union.8 In many cases, climate related MDB loans are coupled with grants from different funds described in this module. At the core of grant-based climate, finance provided through the MDBs are the Climate Investment Funds, a joint initiative of the World Bank and the Regional Development Banks envisioned to provide climate finance in line with the UNFCCC framework but without prejudicing outcomes of UNFCCC negotiations. With pledges of US$ 7.6 billion and currently 67 approved projects for a total of US$ 2.7 billion, the Climate Invest- ment Funds carry significant weight within the climate finance architecture. However, only a very small part of Climate Investment Funds’ resources can be accessed for CSA activities. The Climate Investment Funds con- sist of two separate funds: The Clean Technology Fund and the Strategic Climate Fund. The Clean Technology 7 A prominent example for the increasing emphasis on environmental issues, including climate change, in MDB lending practices is the re- cent World Bank Group Environment Strategy 2012 – 2022 “Toward a Green, Clean, and Resilient World for All” released in May 2012. At the operational and procedural level, climate change criteria for World Bank lending are stipulated in the World Bank Group Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment, which links to Operational Policy and Bank Procedure 4.01. In this context, climate change criteria are laid out in the Environmental Assessment Sourcebook under Chapter 2: Global and Cross Sectoral Issues in Environmental Assessment. 8 European Commission, 2013.