--- Page 522 ---

509 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation Different stakeholders play different roles in conducting assessments. Evaluation of the roles and capacities of the stakeholders for carrying out assessments is one of the first essential activities for ensuring successful assessments for designing policies and projects.

The national climate change office, the ministry of agriculture, and other relevant ministries define the goals and transition pathways for CSA in countries. The providers of climate and agriculture information at the global and national levels are usually national institutions and universities. Scientists at either the national and sub- national levels conduct assessments, but the practitioners of CSA interventions are subnational administra- tors, extension workers or local farmers. Identification of all stakeholders and their involvement in the design of assessments would contribute to answering basic questions: • What is the target CSA sector? Crop, fisheries, livestock, forestry, water, pasture? What is the target sys- tem? Food production systems, landscape, ecosystem, national economy? • What is the temporal scale? Future periods from the next few years to a hundred years? • What is the spatial extent required by the users? National, subnational, local community or household? • What is the spatial resolution? Metres, kilometres, hundreds of kilometres, individuals, households, com- munity, farm or watershed?

The major steps for designing assessments can be summarized as: • literature review; • identification of stakeholders; • assessment of information needs of stakeholders; • evaluation of role and capacity of stakeholders; and • design of assessments, including agreement on CSA objectives by stakeholders.

Conducting assessments Once the study design is drawn up in consultation with stakeholders, choices can be made about the data, methods and tools that best meet the specified spatial and temporal scales and the other requirements of the assessments. A variety of methods, tools and databases for climate data, climate downscaling tools and vul- nerability assessment tools are described in GTZ (2009), World Bank (2009b), UNDP (2009), UNDP (2010), and FAO (2012b). CSA planners should choose a method that suits the needs of the project and programme. There is no single method that is applicable to all CSA projects.

Climate impact assessment Changes in climate CSA is a response to historical and current changes in climate and projected climate change. Weather and climate data are key components of all CSA interventions. A correct understanding of local climatic conditions, trends and projections form a foundation for assessing climate impacts and monitoring and evaluating CSA practices. Focus should be on climatic variables that are related to agriculture, such as rainfall and the inten- sity, extent, and duration of droughts.

Weather observations are collected at tens of thousands of land-based weather stations across the world.

They are complemented by observation by ships, radiosondes, aircraft and satellites. Some of the data are shared with the international community; other data are owned by the country. At the outset, it is advisable to inquire with the national weather service about data availability. Data availability and quality varies significantly by location, country, climatic variables and temporal frequencies. Observed climate data may be verified and complemented by local knowledge of climate trends. Future projections of climate are outputs from global cli- mate models that typically operate at a coarse resolution of about 100 kilometres x 100 kilometres, or larger.

Global data are often translated into finer spatial scales through downscaling methods. For more discussions of climate data collection and analysis, consult FAO (2012b), UNDP (2009) and UNFCCC (2010b).