--- • Reduced GHG emissions; ---

505 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation A common problem in the evaluation of results is the attribution challenge (i.e. To what degree is it possible to attribute results to a project intervention rather than to other external causes?). For example, from the indica- tors in the table below, the adoption of climate-smart forest technologies may be the result of other forest pro- grammes, or market forces; and the proportion of people living below the poverty line may be due to migration and wider economic forces. The attribution issue is usually dealt with through robust sampling when setting baselines and making impact evaluations of project interventions (discussed further later in the module).

Table 18.4 shows examples of indicators of common outputs, outcomes and impacts in monitoring and evalua- tion for CSA programmes and projects. Their refinement ensures that they are measurable and will be context- specific. Disaggregating data where possible (e.g. by gender and other key target groups) is important.

Table 18.4 Examples of indicators of common outputs, outcomes and impacts in monitoring and evaluation for CSA programmes and projects Poverty and household impacts (where possible this data should be disaggregated by gender or by male- and female- headed households) • Percentage of population that is food insecure; • Percentage of population below the poverty line; • Household income, income variability and diversification; • Gini coefficient; • Marketing and commercialization chains that are adapted to changing conditions; • Proportion of food and income that comes from climate-sensitive sources; • Amount of time spent collecting firewood; and • Amount of time spent collecting water.

Outcomes in terms of CSA-related productive change • Agricultural productivity (e.g. tonnage of crop produced per hectare); • Changes in land use (area); • Reduced GHG emissions; • Changes in productive resilience to climate variability; • Changes in biophysical characteristics (e.g. content of soil organic matter); and • Diversification from climate-sensitive livelihood sources.

Outcomes in terms of adoption of CSA systems • Number of irrigation systems that raised drought prevention standards and area of farmland area covered; • Number of soil and water conservation works; • Area of farmland that adopted CSA technologies (e.g. reduced tillage, permanent crop cover, agroforestry); • Forest area in which climate-smart technologies are adopted; • Number of fisherfolk who adopted climate-smart fishery technologies, disaggregated by sex; and • Increased access of women to land and/or productive resources.

Outputs and outcomes related to capacity-building and service-related interventions • Number of people who benefited from capacity development, disaggregated by sex; • Number of male- and female-headed households that have gained direct household benefits from more climate-resilient agriculture infrastructure; • Farm-gate and market price; • Women beneficiaries constitute half of participants in capacity-development activities; and • Number of officials trained on the inclusion of gender issues in CSA.

Institutional outputs and outcomes • Strategy, policy and regulation formulated for CSA; • Inclusion of climate change in agricultural policy frameworks; • Actions identified and planned by local authorities to address significant vulnerabilities and opportunities not yet present in existing strategies and actions; • Public commitments made to identify and manage climate-related risk; • Proportion of budget allocated to support CSA; • Proportion of budget allocated to agricultural research and development; • Evidence of climate change mainstreaming in national and local agricultural development plans; and • Increase in number of women participating in local, national and regional dialogues on CSA.