--- Case Study 2.7 ---

70 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case Study 2.7 Assessing ecosystem services at a territorial scale – options for policy making, planning, and monitoring in the Kagera river basin ©FAO/Giulio Napolitano Lake Burera in Rwanda Introduction The goal of the Transboundary Agro-ecosystem Management Project for the Kagera River Basin (Kagera TAMP) (described at http://www.fao.org/nr/kagera/), which is funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and implemented by FAO, is to adopt an integrated ecosystem approach for the management of land resources in the Kagera River Basin. The Basin is shared by Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. Interventions are being monitored in terms of the local, national and global benefits that are generated. These benefits include: restoration of degraded lands; carbon sequestration; climate change adaptation; sustainable use of agricultural biodiversity; and improved agricultural production and rural livelihoods. Indirect benefits that are being monitored are the project’s contribution to the protection of international waters and enhanced food security. In the project’s monitoring framework, a participatory multisector process for assessing and mapping of land degradation and sustainable land management was undertaken for the entire basin.

The landscape approach There are various land assessment tools that are suitable for application at a landscape scale for planning and management of natural resources and ecosystems and for supporting CSA interventions. The land degradation and SLM appraisal was based on a method jointly developed by the LADA project (www.fao.org/nr/lada/). The LADA project was executed by FAO and supported by GEF/United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in collaboration with the World Overview of Conservation Approaches and Technologies Secretariat. The assessment was conducted across the entire river basin: at the national level in Burundi and Rwanda, where the basin covers more than 60 percent of the national territories; and in relevant parts of the Kagera basin in Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. A series of participatory meetings were held that included selected multisectoral experts. Also carried out was an assessment and mapping of the extent, severity and intensity of various degradation types or processes encountered in the basin, as well as the extent and effectiveness of various SLM measures that were applied by diverse land users in the basin. The results, built up through consensus among groups of experts from multiple sectors, provided the baseline information and a harmonized territorial estimation of the