--- Opportunities and Risks of Climate Change and Disasters (ORCHID), Community-based Risk Screening Tool ---

89 MODULE 3: Water management table is based on the section, ‘Land and water systems at risk’, from the State of land and water resources for food and agriculture (FAO, 2011a).

The table A.3.1 illustrates that a farming system’s vulnerability is directly related to its relative dependency on elements of the water cycle, and in particular rainfall variability. With or without climate change, agricul- tural societies most at risk are those that rely exclusively on farming for their livelihood, have little scope for diversification and are highly exposed to climate variability. Most of the responses that are needed to increase the resilience of these farmers are not necessarily specific to climate change. Actions that build resilience in- clude: better conservation of soil moisture (in particular through improved soil water holding capacity or ac- cess supplementary irrigation); better storage of grain; and better access to markets and to drought protec- tion schemes. Climate change only represents an additional justification for actions that are already needed.

The distinction between rainfed and irrigated production systems will dictate the impacts and associated risks related to climate change. Rainfed systems in sub-tropics and semi-arid tropics will be mostly affected by changes in rainfall patterns and temperatures. These changes will lead to greater frequency of crop fail- ures as a result of increased variations in soil moisture. In mountainous areas, rainfed farming in marginal areas will also be affected by the impact of extreme events, including intense rainfalls, floods and erosion.

Pastoral areas will suffer from more frequent drying of water points and greater variability in available ani- mal feed.

Irrigated systems are better protected against rainfall variability. But these systems will increasingly re- quire greater storage capacity to respond to more frequent droughts and floods and changes in the annual distribution of runoff. For surface or groundwater systems already being over-exploited, climate change will add an extra burden to water management and generally lead to a reduction in the availability of water and greater competition for water resources.

Aquatic systems and capture fisheries will be affected by changes in quantity and quality of freshwater, which will have an impact on production. Many aquatic species depend on the timing of rainfall and flood events for important migrations (e.g. spawning and feeding). Changes in precipitation may disrupt these migrations or force these species to make adaptations in their life history patterns. Integrated irrigation systems (e.g. rice and fish) could see changes in system components as climate change alters the suitability of the environ- ment, (e.g. more or less water may require different species of fish). Increased storage (i.e. more or larger reservoirs) could promote integration of fish farming through cage culture and enhance the fisheries produc- tion (see also Module 10 on fisheries and aquaculture). 3.5 Assessing risk, preparing responses Many governments and development agencies have developed tools to assess the risk associated with cli- mate change in relation to expected changes and populations’ vulnerability (OECD, 2009). Examples include Opportunities and Risks of Climate Change and Disasters (ORCHID), Community-based Risk Screening Tool – Adaptation and Livelihoods (CRisTAL), and tools developed by CARE and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. These tools can be classified by the type of approach they use. There are two types of approaches: a top down approach focuses on potential changes in the water cycle as a result of climate change, and designs response options to anticipate and prevent the negative impacts of these changes. By nature, this approach favours long-term responses. The other approach consists in assess- ing the vulnerability of rural populations, and designing solutions that helps increasing their resilience to external shocks. This bottom-up approach is more generic, not specific to climate change (but to any shock or crisis) and usually considers short- to medium-term responses. Both approaches are necessary when designing water management responses in relation to climate change. An impact-based approach is needed to ensure that long-term investments such as irrigation development take into account expected changes in water supply and demand.