--- Page 240 ---

227 MODULE 8: Climate-smart Livestock Building resilience along supply chains Landless livestock systems rely on purchased inputs. Climate change contributes to increased price volatil- ity of these inputs, especially feed and energy, which increases the financial risks for stakeholders involved in the livestock supply chain. This is especially true where commodity stocks of inputs are kept at a minimum throughout the supply chain and buffering options against price hikes are limited. In addition, the changing disease patterns caused by climate change can quickly affect landless systems that heavily rely on transport in the supply chain. Resilience can be achieved either by allowing chains to overcome the crisis or by creating the conditions for quick recovery after the crisis. Although little experience has yet been developed in this area, greater coordination among the different stakeholders involved in the supply chain, insurance schemes, buff- ers and stocks may contribute to a greater resilience of supply chains that rely on landless livestock systems.

Conclusions Livestock can make a large contribution to climate-smart food supply systems. The sector offers substantial potential for climate change mitigation and adaptation. Mitigation options are available along the entire supply chain and are mostly associated with feed production, enteric fermentation and manure management. Live- stock’s role in adaptation practices relates to organic matter and nutrient management (soil restoration) and income diversification. Livestock also makes a key contribution to food security, especially in marginal lands where it represents a unique source of energy, protein and micronutrients. The contribution of the livestock sector to food security could be strengthened, particularly in areas where current levels of consumption of livestock products are low.

This module has highlighted how some practices require making tradeoffs between adaptation, mitigation and food security. However, most practices offer opportunities to exploit synergies in these areas. Several CSA practices are readily available for implementation, such as sylvopastoral systems, grassland restoration and management, manure management (recycling and biodigestion) and crop-livestock integration. Barriers to adoptions are most often related to a lack of information, limited access to technology and insufficient capi- tal. Overcoming these barriers requires specific policy interventions, including extension work and financing mechanisms, such schemes for improving access to credit and payment for environmental services (see Mod- ules 13 on policies and 14 on financing).

Research efforts are also required to identify additional combinations of mitigation and adaptation practices that are adapted to specific production systems and environments (e.g. combined interventions addressing the management of feed, genetic resources and manure). The potential aggregated effects that changes in farm- ing systems may have on food security and the use of natural resources at the regional level also need to be better understood.

This module has also highlighted that CSA approaches need to take into consideration production systems and supply chains. This is especially true in the case of livestock, given the strong interrelationships with crops (feed and manure management) and the wider environment. Addressing mitigation or adaptation issues re- quires paying attention to spillover and feedback effects along the chain.