--- operative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere, Oxfam, or Conservation International have all invested in CSA ---

404
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Figure 14.6
Public climate finance: RTRS certification and REDD+ carbon markets
Public finance as stepping stone to REDD market: Mato Grosso soy
Brazil’s Low Carbon Ag Credit;
FIP or Amazon Fund
REDD Market
(e.g. GCF, coomodity buyers)
Mato Grosso Achieves Sector-Wide Deforestation Target
Soy Farmers
Seeking RTRS Certification
(Alianca da Terra, Aprosoja)

Certified, Legal, Zero Deforestation
Soy Supply Chain
Riparian Forest Restoration Fund,
“Legal Reserve” Compensation
Fund ($100M)
$
$
$
Another private funding source is philanthropic contributions, usually channelled through charitable founda-
tions or international non-governmental organizations. Organizations like the Rockefeller Foundation, the Co-
operative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere, Oxfam, or Conservation International have all invested in CSA
activities (Shames et al., 2012). The Rockefeller Foundation’s Developing Climate Change Resilience Initiative
is one of the most visible programmes in this context. The Howard G. Buffett Foundation supports CSA projects
in Tanzania, Burundi, Sierra Leone and Sudan through a partnership with the Cooperative for Assistance and
Relief Everywhere.
A final example for involvement of private sector actors in CSA activities, albeit not in the form of direct in-
vestments, is the international insurance business. The establishment of insurance schemes to help farmers
manage agricultural climate change risks, while providing incentives for risk prevention and improvement of
risk information (The Geneva Asssociation, 2012), has become one of the innovative and prominently employed
instruments used in the design of many CSA projects financed through international climate finance. In this,
the private insurance sector is often a crucial partner and provider of tailored services and products as well as
knowledge and expertise.
Prospective development in climate finance for CSA
This section began with the premise that receiving funding for CSA activities within the international climate
finance landscape is challenging, but that there are signs that this situation is improving. Probably the clearest
sign can be found in the ongoing discussions on the sixth replenishment of the GEF and the formulation of new
GEF-6 Focal Area Strategies. The GEF’s movement towards combining adaptation and mitigation activities has
already been discussed. This trend continues in the draft GEF-6 Strategy for climate Change Mitigation which
turns an explicit spotlight on CSA. While agriculture was hardly mentioned in the GEF-5 CCM Strategy, the cur-
rent GEF-6 CCM draft highlights cross-cutting financing options as one of GEF’s specific value propositions,
explicitly citing CSA as an example:
Since GEF-5, an increasing number of projects that address both mitigation and adaptation are being sup-
ported by the GEF to help countries realize the low carbon and climate resilient development goals. Topics of
emerging importance to address the global commons, such as urban management and climate- smart agri-
culture, also transcend mitigation and adaptation concerns. The flexibility of the GEF to support such initiatives