--- initiative, UN CC:Learn, advocates the development of National Strategies to Strengthen Human ---

478
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
mechanisms to foster knowledge generation and sharing. More specifically, in 2010 FAO’s renewed corporate
approach to CD recommends that the following functional capacities should be enhanced (complementing
technical capacity strengthening) to enable countries and regions to plan, lead, manage and sustain change
initiatives:
• Implementation capacity: implement and deliver programmes and projects, from planning to monitoring
and evaluation.
• Partnering capacity: engage in networks, alliance and partnerships
• Knowledge capacity: access, generate, manage and exchange information and knowledge
• Policy and normative capacity: formulate and implement policies and lead policy reform

Table 17.2 provides some examples of required capacities at the different levels.
Table 17.2
Examples of required technical and functional capacities for climate-smart agriculture by level

Individual level
Organizational level
Policy level
Technical
capacity
(technical)
Regularly updated
knowledge and skills.
Understanding of broader
technical context of CSA.
Appropriate knowledge and
skills mix, such as agronomic,
environmental, engineering,
economic, social, legal, financial,
institutional knowledge; knowledge
on investment procedures
Policy for critical review of
knowledge and information;
allocation of adequate resources for
CSA related capacity development
requirements
Implementation
capacity
(functional)
Skills for CSA project and
finance management;
personnel/team
management/mentoring
skills, ability to deliver,
leadership, mediation skills.
Ability to set goals/strategies.
Financial and people management;
staff rotation; incentive systems,
project management including
proper planning and M&E, ability to
deliver in a timely manner.
Sound task assignments and clear
mandate of sector agencies; cross-
sectoral collaboration mechanisms;
sound finance and budgeting
systems, facilitating proper
organisational management.
Partnering
capacity
(functional)
Ability to engage
stakeholders, apply
inclusiveness; capacity for
collective action
Transparent decision-making
processes (including budgets and
plans); accountable procedures
for stakeholder consultation and
empowerment.
Policy to ensure inclusiveness,
transparency and accountability;
conducive regulations.
Knowledge
capacity
(functional)
Desire to keep learning
and attend trainings, self
reflection of performance;
skills for knowledge sharing
and management.
Procedures for continuous
performance review; mechanisms
and rewards to support information/
knowledge exchange and learning;
support for communities of practice.
Policy to promote an open work
atmosphere and inclusiveness;
openness to continuous sector
performance review and
implementation of adjustments.
Policy and
normative
capacity
(functional)
Ability to meaningfully
engage in CSA-related policy
and planning processes
Ability to formulate and implement
policies and lead policy reform,
including climate change
mainstreaming in policies.
Capacity to administer legal and
institutional frameworks, including
those related to UNFCCC.
Source: based on UNESCO-IHE & UNW-DPC 2009, adapted for CSA with different classifications of functional capacities
In many cases, a strategic approach to skills development and learning for CSA is required. For instance,
the One UN initiative, UN CC:Learn, advocates the development of National Strategies to Strengthen Human
Resources Capacities to Advance Green, Low Emission and Climate Resilient Development. It is piloting such