--- the United States. ---

85 MODULE 3: Water management The high level of pressure on water resources has had serious impacts on water users and the environment.

Competition over water use is growing in river basins where there are no measures in place for arbitrating conflicts. Evidence shows that biodiversity is declining more rapidly for freshwater-dependent species than for species from other types of ecosystems (Comprehensive Assessment, 2007). The large-scale public surface irrigation systems built during the green revolution dominated the landscape until the early 1980s and had a profound impact on the flow of many rivers. Over the last 30 years, private investments, stimulated by the avail- ability of cheap pumps and well drilling capacity, have been directed to tapping groundwater. Consequently, aquifers are being depleted in countries with key agricultural production systems, including China, India, and the United States.

Water demand from cities and industries has been booming as a result of rapid economic growth in emerg- ing countries. This growth has put pressure on irrigation schemes to release water for urban and industrial users. Pollution from agriculture, cities and industries has affected rivers and aquifers and further reduced the amount of water available for use. The trends towards an increasing demand for water from all sectors is expected to continue in the coming decades as the population reaches 9 billion people in 2050 and economic growth increases the consumption of food and manufactured goods.

The role climate change will play with regards to water in agriculture must be considered in this context of rapid increases in water withdrawals, the degradation of water quality and the competition for water at all levels. The following sections look at the current state of knowledge about climate change impacts on water resources and the demand for these resources. These impacts are framed within the overall perspective of the current status, trends and challenges of water management in agriculture. Of particular interest are aspects of change that are specific to climate and as such require specific responses. 3.3 Potential impacts of climate change on water in agriculture Figure 3.1 How climate change affects all the elements of the water cycle and its impact on agriculture