--- Page 520 ---

507 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation More detailed CSA options assessments contribute to the development of more specific baselines of the pre- sent status against which measurements can be made to see if CSA practices improve local agriculture. These are project and programme baselines and usually refer only to the status at the beginning of an intervention.

Associated with these baselines are the related indicators and targets of objectives and changes expected, which are used to frame the CSA project. Evaluation of the impacts of CSA interventions is made against these project and programme baselines at the end of a project cycle. Progress being made towards important inter- mediate outcomes and results is also often monitored during implementation.

However, as climate conditions evolve over the project and programme cycles, and new information about im- pacts of and vulnerability to climate change becomes available, baseline projections may need to be revised periodically. Adaptation processes need to be designed in response to evolving climate conditions. The carbon balance of the ecosystem is dynamic and may change over time in the absence of mitigation interventions.

Project managers may need to adjust the CSA interventions according to revised baseline projections at the project’s mid-cycle and evaluate the project’s benefits against the new projections.

Over a short period of time, changes in baselines or baseline projections can be subtle, so they are not a great concern for shorter CSA projects (GIZ, 2011a). The use of ‘control’ groups when doing impact evaluations should be able to account for some of the variability in baselines (more on this in Annex 18.1 on basic tools) as well as changes in other factors, such as markets and the broader economy.

However, for longer-term projects and programmes (more than 5 years), monitoring and evaluation should take place against a ‘moving’ baseline or up-to-date baseline projections as well as against the typical project and programme baselines. An additional use of baseline projections is recommended for CSA practitioners to deal with the characteristics of longer-term climate change adaptation and mitigation actions.

Table 18.5 Examples of variables used for measuring baseline projections and project and programme baselines Examples of variables used in climate change baseline projection within a specific geographic region of interest, include: • Key climatic variables such as temperature, rainfall, and its seasonality; • Frequency and intensity of extreme weather events; • Water availability; • Climate-risk prone areas; • The number of people affected by floods or prone to flood risks; • Agricultural productivity in terms of crop yield (without any adaptation measures); and • GHG emissions (without any mitigation measures).

Examples of variables and indicators for setting project and programme baseline at the beginning of intervention to compare with end results include: • Irrigation, water availability and withdrawal; • Size of farm and land-use areas by crop (both cash crops and crops grown for household consumption) and management practices; • Livestock numbers and management practices; • Domestic market prices and their volatility; • Population groups and their location categorized by poverty, food security, vulnerability and other key socio-economic factors, such as caste, class or age, disaggregated by sex; and • Percentage of the population with access to and control over key resources for adaptation (CSA technologies, crop insurance, early warning information, seasonal climate forecasts), again disaggregated by sex and other key socio-economic factors.