--- FAO, the UN Water Decade Programme on Capacity Development (UNW-DPC) and local partners organized five ---

481 MODULE 17: Capacity development for climate-smart agriculture 17.3 Strategies for knowledge sharing and effective learning Knowledge sharing and effective learning comprise key components of a comprehensive and more sustainable capacity development approach. Farmers and pastoralists have been dealing with natural climate variability over millennia and have developed a wide range of coping strategies. Many of these remain valid in a climate change context, though scientists expect many to be insufficient to deal with the impacts of climate change in the long term. In addition, much of this indigenous knowledge is likely to be lost as local farming population aged and youth tend to migrate to urban areas or engage in activities other than farming. Therefore, docu- menting, mobilizing and sharing indigenous knowledge can be vital for safeguarding and further developing local adaptation strategies.

Box 17.4 CD for farm management strategies to improve crop-water productivity using AquaCrop Context It is commonly acknowledged that most climate change impacts will be felt through water. The free AquaCrop software is an important tool for increasing water use efficiency in rain-fed and irrigated agricultural production systems. Developed and applied by FAO and multiple partner institutions, it is mainly intended for practitioners such as those working for extension services, governmental agencies, NGOs, and farmers associations though it is also used by scientists and for teaching. AquaCrop uses a relatively small number of simple input variables to enable easy use while maintaining accuracy and robustness. AquaCrop can serve as a benchmarking tool, comparing the attainable yields against actual yields of a field, farm or region. It can help develop irrigation schedules for different climate scenarios, assess water productivity at various scales and support decision making on water allocation and other water policy actions.

Methodology In response to the urgent need of significantly raising the number of adequately trained water professionals, FAO, the UN Water Decade Programme on Capacity Development (UNW-DPC) and local partners organized five regional, one week “training of trainers” workshops in 2009/2010. In total, 147 participants from 58 countries and over 100 institutions were trained in the practical applications of AquaCrop, improving their skills in strategic farm management for increased crop-water productivity.

The five local host institutions (mainly research institutions or ministries) in China, Iran, Burkina Faso, Egypt and South-Africa were actively engaged in selecting the participants. The nearly 500 applications contained motivation and reference letters and proof of at least 3 years’ professional experience in a related field to ensure that participants would disseminate their newly derived knowledge in their institutions and home countries. Most selected participants received scholarships. 43 percent of them came from academia, 32 percent from national research institutes, 15 percent from ministries or government agencies, 7 percent from international development organizations, 2 percent from private companies and 1 percent from NGOs. The training was delivered by means of lectures and computer- based hands-on exercises. Both the theoretical and practical sessions of these workshops were followed by the participants with high interest and active involvement. The open, interactive approach adopted for the training program was a key factor for its success. Prior to participating, trainees had to complete a questionnaire on capacity development needs in the field of water and food. This was then analyzed in order to assess the specific gaps in terms of individual, institutional and organizational capacity.

Outcomes Six months after the last workshop, participants were invited to present case studies on their use of the software and to discuss their experiences in training others. The best cases were then presented at the International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage’s Asian regional conference held in Indonesia in October 2010. Of the 19 participants that attended, 16 had trained a further 120 people. Finally, a 6th workshop was organized, inviting the strongest case studies from the previous workshops to share their experiences of using AquaCrop in different agro-climatic conditions. The workshop also analyzed the success of former workshops and identified further follow-up activities for participants to undertake within their countries.

Source: UNW-DPC, 2011