--- Page 65 ---

52 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK In addition, integration across multiple administrative levels (local, subnational, national and international) is crucial for sustaining landscape interventions. Bottom-up approaches are necessary to ensure local stakehold- ers have ownership over landscape management, are accountable for the results and are able to reap tangible benefits. However, the climate-smart management of resources at the local level can only succeed if subnational and national governments are involved in the process and can create an enabling policy and institutional environ- ment. Stakeholders at all levels must identify, negotiate, and manage the benefits and impacts of different land uses to ensure that the envisioned goals materialize at the local level (Scherr et al., 2012). This process must also recognize the connections that link rural, peri-urban and urban communities, including peri-urban and urban forests, gardens, farms and open spaces that tie landscapes together in a mosaic of natural green spaces.

Although the landscape approach, which involves multisector and multistakeholder interventions across multi- ple scales, makes planning and management challenging, there are no other options for achieving CSA’s goals (Holmgren, 2012).

Strategic steps towards a landscape approach In a landscape approach, the management of production systems and natural resources covers an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services, but small enough to be managed by the people using the land pro- ducing those services. However, there are many definitions of the term ‘landscape’ (see Box 2.5). It is important to delineate the common elements of a successful landscape approach and to describe how it can be a viable strategy for achieving CSA.

Integrated landscape planning and management is an umbrella term for natural resource management that recognizes the value of various ecosystem services to multiple stakeholders, and how different values can lead stakeholders to pursue different land-use objectives or livelihood strategies (MEA, 2005). More recent- ly, the term has been re-defined to also include societal concerns related to conservation and development trade-offs, including increased integration of poverty alleviation goals, increased integration of agricultural production and food security with an emphasis on adaptive management, stakeholder involvement and mul- tiple objectives (Sunderland, 2012). The common underlying philosophy of integrated landscape planning and Box 2.5 Definitions of landscapes The Council of Europe (COE) defines a landscape as “an area, as perceived by people, whose character is the result of the action and interaction of natural and/or human factors” (COE, 2000). Cultural landscapes have been defined by the World Heritage Committee as “distinct geographical areas or properties uniquely representing the combined work of nature and of man, illustrative of the evolution of human society and settlement over time, under the influence of the physical constraints and/or opportunities presented by their natural environment and of successive social, economic and cultural forces, both external and internal” (WHC 1996). Expanding on this, landscapes may be defined as the concrete and characteristic products of the interaction between human societies and culture with the natural environment.

Agricultural landscapes can be described in terms of the three elements: structure, which concerns the interaction between environmental features, land-use patterns and human-made objects; functions, which are the provision of environmental services for farmers and society; and the values society puts on agricultural landscapes and the costs of maintaining and enhancing landscape provisions by agriculture (Jongman, 2004). Because the underlying human and natural processes are subject to change and evolution, landscapes are ‘dynamic systems’ (Washer et al., 1999).

People have been managing the world’s natural resources and landscapes for generations to meet multiple needs, including food, fibre, fodder, fuel, building materials, medicinal products and water. Farming, forestry and fisheries systems have evolved and adapted to variable environmental conditions and population pressures. These systems have been influenced by other factors, such as settlement patterns, tenure arrangements, labour availability and resource, credit and market access. Because of these complex interactions, there is a huge diversity of natural, semi-natural and man-made landscapes that contain many differently sized livelihood systems.

Source: Reiche et al., 2012