--- Page 541 ---

528 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Uncertainty is inherent in the climate-agriculture system and cannot necessarily be reduced through scientific advances. Uncertainty is to be managed and is not to be used as an excuse for delaying action. A wise approach is to take account of uncertainties and be flexible in planning adaptation strategies that withstand unpredict- able futures in a robust way. These strategies would minimize vulnerability to a range of possible risks, rather than propose an optimal policy that performs better than the others on average. When new information be- comes available, adjustments may need to be made to the assessments of climate change impacts, baseline projections, CSA measures and indicators for monitoring and evaluation (GIZ, 2011a among others). This is where a project monitoring and evaluation system with strong learning mechanisms can be particularly useful.

All assumptions that are made in the assessment process and the sensitivities of these assumptions should be explicitly stated and communicated. This will help practitioners to interpret the results of assessments for policy and project design and allow them to better deal with uncertainties.

When there is no reliable information on which to base CSA decisions (even after carrying out the appropriate assessments for policy and project design, including a cost-benefit analysis), a project may adopt a general ‘no-regret’ approach. Such an approach brings benefits regardless of the size and direction of climate change (or even in the absence of anthropogenic climate change).

For assessments of mitigation potential, there is still a lack of suitable emission factors and coefficients, par- ticularly in developing countries. Generic coefficients from the IPCC can be used, but they may not correctly reflect the real climatic, biophysical conditions and farming practices of the country. Given this uncertainty, being conservative in the appraisal is a desirable principle to adopt: the emissions of the baseline and baseline projection should not be overestimated and future emissions with the adoption of CSA should not be underesti- mated. This conservative appraisal will reinforce the credibility of the results. Sensitivity analysis to uncertain- ties in emission factors or alternative assumptions must also be carried out.

Attribution difficulty As noted with projects, the attribution of impacts (e.g. adoption of technologies) can be difficult to evaluate with most monitoring and evaluation systems. This has implications for the way project impact evaluations are de- signed and the tools that are used (see 18.4. and Annex 18.1). Factoring in the effects of climate change makes the issue even more challenging.

Climate is variable by nature. The weather experienced daily is a combined result of natural climate variability and anthropogenic climate change. It is difficult to separate the two for the purposes of assessing impacts of climate change or the monitoring and evaluation of impacts of CSA interventions (Lamhauge et al., 2011; Hedger et al., 2008). It is also not easy to clearly distinguish the effects of many adaptation options from those achieved by broader sectoral development policies (UNFCCC, 2010a; Lamhauge et al., 2011). The distinction is especially ambiguous when climate change adaptation interventions are not designed and implemented as stand-alone projects or components, but incorporated into various development activities. Indicators for the successful implementation of CSA that can be attributed to a specific intervention should ideally reflect achievements in addressing the additional impacts of climate change, such as the capacity to cope with in- creased frequency and intensity of natural disasters over the long term.

It should also be noted that climatic risks are not static. The baseline situation and baseline projections against which impacts of CSA are evaluated may change as climatic conditions change (Hedger et al., 2008; Lamhauge et al., 2011; OECD, 2009). Frequent updating of a ‘moving’ baseline with new information on climate, hazards, extreme events, and their impacts on agriculture is necessary to make the appropriate adjustments to CSA interventions and targets (Lamhauge et al., 2011; Hedger et al., 2008; Villanueva, 2010).

Inadequate capacity for assessment and monitoring and evaluation Inadequate capacities (technical, human, institutional) and resources (human and financial) are often cited as barriers to successful assessment, monitoring and evaluation activities (UNFCCC, 2010a). The current trend is