--- the coordination of the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), the HFA is a ---

417 MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience 15.1 Disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation Climate change is expected to result in more frequent and intensive climate-related hazards. It will also reduce the predictability and change the geographic distribution of extreme climatic hazards, such as extreme tem- peratures, floods and droughts, heat waves, wild fires and storms. Existing vulnerabilities will be compounded by climate change-related processes, such as rising sea levels, increased glacier melt, stressed ecosystems and the degradation of natural resources (IPCC, 2007).

Meanwhile, the world continues to cope with the devastating effects of natural disasters stemming from geo- logical and weather-related hazards. Experience shows that the negative and cumulative impact of these dis- asters erodes livelihoods and coping capacities over time, reduces food production and increases hunger. The clear link between disasters and hunger is an indication of the fragility of food production systems and their vulnerability to natural hazards (FAO, 2011b). Evidence reveals the direct contribution these disasters make to reversing development and the gains made in poverty reduction. Worldwide, vigorous efforts have helped to strengthen the capacity of communities and nations to cope with natural hazards, and to reduce their exposure and vulnerability. This has been accomplished through the establishment of national and local institutional structures and DRR strategies, as well as the development and effective application of methodologies, practi- cal tools and community-based approaches to reduce risk.

Global experiences and established capacities in addressing disaster risk are directly relevant to climate change adaptation and CSA. By now, many countries have made significant progress in meeting the priorities agreed to in the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA). Endorsed by 193 member states and implemented under the coordination of the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), the HFA is a 10-year plan to make the world safer from natural hazards (UNISDR, 2005). DRR is understood as the “concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic efforts to analyse and manage the causal factors of disasters, including through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and property, wise management of land and the environment, and improved preparedness for adverse events”(UNISDR, 2009c).

While distinct in scope, DRR and climate change adaptation share a common concern over climate-related extreme events. In the agriculture sector, they both aim to build resilient livelihoods.

Recognizing this interconnectedness, the parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) adopted the Cancun Adaptation Framework, which calls for enhanced climate change- related DRR strategies that take into consideration the HFA where appropriate. This link is also formally ac- knowledged in the UNFCCC’s Bali Action Plan. The United Nations Secretary-General noted that “better DRR will help the world adapt to climate change”; and that DRR should be applied “...as a first line of defence in adapting to climate change” (Ban, 2008). The aim should be to “capitalize on the common concerns of adap- tation and risk reduction in policies and practical action, and to seek the triple win of lower disaster risks, adaptation to climate change, and sustainable development outcomes” (UNISDR, 2009c). Building resilience through sound safety nets, DRR and adaptation planning is one of the six priority areas for action in the re- cent Report of the Secretary General’s High-level Panel on Global Sustainability (High-level Panel on Global Sustainability, 2012). The post-2015 United Nations development agenda agreed to at the Rio+20 conference calls for the integration of risk reduction and adaptation into sustainable development strategies (UN System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda, 2012). CSA will benefit significantly from following this holistic approach that blends adaptation measures with global experience in risk reduction. 15.2 Planning for resilience against multiple risks The multiple threats to agriculture and food security Building resilience requires that we “grasp the dimension of multiple challenges” (High-level Panel on Global Sustainability, 2012). An examination of the diversity of natural hazards affecting agriculture and food secu- rity indicates that, even without climate change, a multiplicity of hazards are already eroding livelihoods and