--- Page 229 ---

216 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Contribution to food security Livestock make a necessary and important contribution to global calorie and protein supplies. However, live- stock need to be managed carefully to maximize this contribution. While livestock products are not absolutely essential to human diets, they are valued and they will continue to be consumed in increasing amounts. Meat, milk and eggs in appropriate amounts are valuable sources of complete and easily digestible protein and es- sential micronutrients. Overconsumption causes health problems.

Livestock can increase the world’s edible protein balance by transforming inedible protein found in forage into forms that people can digest. On the other hand, livestock can also reduce the global edible protein balance by consuming large amounts edible protein found in cereal grains and soybeans and converting it into small amounts of animal protein. The choice of production systems and good management practices are important for optimizing the protein output from livestock. Livestock production and marketing can help stabilize the food supplies and provide individuals and communities with a buffer against economic shocks and natural disas- ters. However, the food supply from livestock can be destabilized, particularly by disease outbreaks.

Access to food derived from livestock is affected by income and social customs. Access to livestock as a source of income, and hence food, is also unequal. Gender dynamics play a part in this inequality, particularly in pasto- ralist and small-scale farming communities, where female-headed households tend to have fewer resources and consequently own fewer and smaller livestock, and within families where the larger and more commercial livestock operations are often controlled by men. These problems are not unique to livestock, but they are prevalent among both producers and consumers of livestock products and they demand attention. 8.2 Adaptation and mitigation needs The impact of climate change on livestock Climate change poses serious threats to livestock production. However, these impacts are difficult to quantify due to the sector’s uncertain and complex interactions between agriculture, climate, the surrounding environ- ment and the economy. Increased temperatures, shifts in rainfall distribution and increased frequency of ex- treme weather events are expected to adversely affect livestock production and productivity around the world.

These adverse impacts can be the direct result of increased heat stress and reduced water availability. Indirect impacts can result from the reduced quality and availability of feed and fodder, the emergence of livestock disease and greater competition for resources with other sectors (Thornton, 2010; Thornton and Gerber, 2010; FAO, 2009b).

The effects of climate change on livestock are likely to be widespread. The most serious impacts are antici- pated in grazing systems because of their dependence on climatic conditions and the natural resource base, and their limited adaptation opportunities (Aydinalp and Cresser, 2008). Impacts are expected to be most se- vere in arid and semi-arid grazing systems at low latitudes, where higher temperatures and lower rainfall are expected to reduce yields on rangelands and increase land degradation (Hoffmann and Vogel, 2008).

The direct impacts of climate change are likely to be more limited in non-grazing systems mostly because the housing of animals in buildings allows for greater control of production conditions (Thornton and Ger- ber, 2010; FAO, 2009b). In non-grazing systems, indirect impacts from lower crop yields, feed scarcity and higher energy prices will be more significant. Climate change could lead to additional indirect impacts from the increased emergence of livestock diseases, as higher temperatures and changed rainfall patterns can alter the abundance, distribution and transmission of animal pathogens (Baylis and Githeko, 2006). How- ever, the net impacts of climate change are unclear when considered in combination with other important environmental and socio-economic factors that also affect disease prevalence, such as changes in land use, host abundance, international trade, migration and public health policy (Randolph, 2008; Kurukulasuriya and Rosenthal, 2003).