--- A Regional Approach to Joint DRR and climate change adaptation: the Incheon ---

438 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Reduction in the Americas. Working through or with these networks enhances coherence, helps to build syner- gies and taps into existing expertise and practice.

In addition to the regional platforms, a number of regional inter-governmental organizations have developed disaster risk reduction strategies or frameworks for cooperation in DRR at the regional level, such as the ASEAN Regional Programme on Disaster Management. The African Union has developed the Africa Regional Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction and adopted a Programme of Action for the Implementation of the Africa Regional Strategy for DRR. Africa’s Regional Economic Communities (RECs), including the Economic Commu- nity of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern Africa Development Community and the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (WB and GFDRR, 2010), are key partners in the implementation of the strategy. In 2009, Andean countries developed the Andean Strategy for Disaster Prevention and Relief. Central American heads of state adopted in 2010 the legally binding Central American Integrated Policy on Disaster Risk Reduction, which aims at an improved regional commitment to DRR through a common guiding framework (ISDR, 2011a).

At regional levels, links between DRR and climate change adaptation are not yet common. However, pioneering regional initiatives are underway, such as the Incheon REMAP in Asia, illustrated in Box 15.10 below. 15.6 Concluding remarks and recommendations To achieve its multiple objectives, CSA promotes the application and scaling up of proven practices and ap- proaches. It follows a holistic pathway that brings together a number of areas of expertise. An enabling en- vironment and institutional partnerships are vital for achieving CSA. As a contribution to reaching these ob- jectives, this module has illustrated how proven policy and practice in DRR provides a rich resource-base for promoting and scaling up CSA. Key areas in DRR that can support CSA are summarized in Figure 15.11. DDR’s contribution specifically supports CSA’s objective of strengthening resilience to climate change and variability.

Box 15.10 A Regional Approach to Joint DRR and climate change adaptation: the Incheon REMAP in Asia In 2010, the Fourth Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction approved a five-year regional roadmap, the Incheon REMAP. The Incheon REMAP initiative is an example of how governments are providing an enabling policy environment and commitment for joint initiatives in DRR and climate change adaptation at the regional level.

Fifty Asian and Pacific region governments agreed to: “By 2015, establish climate resilient disaster risk management systems that contribute to sustainable development at regional, national, subnational and community levels” (Fourth Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, 2010). The roadmap promotes regional cooperation in Asia on DRR through climate change adaptation. It includes the integration of DRR and climate change adaptation into development for green growth.

The following priority targets were agreed: • 10 countries with integrated approach and institutional structure to promote synergistic financing between disaster risk management and climate change adaptation; • DRR and climate change adaptation investment tracking in place in 10 countries; and • all regional partners combine DRR and climate change adaptation programme or funding.

Other initiatives in the roadmap include: promoting multi-hazard risk assessments and capacities in local settlements; developing and sharing information, technology, sound practices, and lessons learned in climate and disaster risk management; collecting sound practices and lessons learned in DRR and climate change adaptation; developing a platform for sharing information, technologies and sound practices in DRR and climate change adaptation; improving linkages between climate change adaptation and DRR institutions at national and regional level; and implementing joint DRR and climate change projects in selected countries.