--- Source: Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives ---

429 MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience reserves, bio-security of animal production systems, water reserves to buffer droughts and resilient animal breeding (FAO, 2011b). Because of their adaptive value, many of these practices are also promoted by adap- tation strategies. Some practices, such as conservation agriculture, serve multiple functions. Conservation agriculture is an approach promoted for both risk reduction and adaptation because it is particularly suitable for areas that have low soil productivity and are exposed to difficult climatic conditions, such as drought and rainfall irregularity (see for example Module 7 on climate-smart crop production systems). It is also seen as a way to manage agro-ecosystems for improving and sustaining productivity and food security while preserving and enhancing the resource base and the environment (FAO, 2011a).

Technologies and practices promoted by DRR and climate change adaptation can be delivered as a coherent package of solutions to climate variability and change. CSA can provide the common platform for integrating these technologies. At the same time, CSA can achieve significant increases in the scale of its implementa- tion by adopting and promoting DRR practices that are already field tested and proven for building resilient livelihoods. Given the long history of DRR practices, these validated practices offer a large portfolio and broad evidence base for significantly scaling up CSA. The design of CSA initiatives should begin with mapping exist- ing local-specific good practices. One challenge is to identify practices that are effective across different land- scapes and against different types of hazards. Where DRR technologies are known and proven to be effective locally, they can serve as immediate entry points to CSA.

Scaling up proven risk reduction practices can be achieved through policies that support their systematic ex- pansion. Nepal provides a good example of a country that has made knowledge sharing a core priority of its integrated strategy for disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation. Box 15.6 below describes this in more detail.

Box 15.6 Nepal’s strategy on knowledge sharing and management in climate change adaptation and DRR Nepal’s Priority Framework for Action on Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management in Agriculture represents an innovative policy framework that addresses climate change adaptation and DRR in an integrated and coherent manner. The Framework acknowledges the existence of good practice technologies and approaches, and the vital importance of knowledge sharing. The following is a summary of the framework’s strategy for knowledge management.

Priority Area III: Improved knowledge management, database and awareness-raising on climate change impacts, adaptation and disaster risk management.

Objective: Use knowledge to build a culture of innovation and resilience, and institutionalize training on climate change adaptation and disaster risk management in agriculture.

Some key activities planned: • organizing local-level awareness raising campaigns and training programmes for farmers on lessons learned and best practices of disaster risk management, sustainable land management and climate change adaptation; • developing information centres for documentation of local knowledge, risks and vulnerabilities at the village and district level; • establishing a good practice database (includes indigenous and local practices) relevant to agriculture and livestock for climate change adaptation and DRR; • integrating climate change, disaster risk management and sustainable land management into farmer field schools and promoting agricultural extension systems that can demonstrate and disseminate good practices; • promoting the establishment of model demonstrations at regional research centres by involving local communities to showcase relevant good practice examples on climate change adaptation and disaster risk management; • organizing periodical capacity development and knowledge sharing sessions with staff, local institutions and farmers on aspects of climate change adaptation and disaster risk management; and • disseminating tested good practice examples of climate change adaptation and disaster risk management.

Source: Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives et al., 2012