--- Source: R. Vargas based on FAO-ICDS Bolivia, Photos Willy Barba ---

122
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
using salt-affected soils and saline water through innovative soil and water management technologies and
practices (Sakadevan and Nguyen, 2010). Integrated soil and water management practices for adapting to ex-
isting soil and water salinity and mitigating the potential development of salinity include: accurate irrigation
scheduling (Howell, 2003); permanent raised bed (Akbar et al., 2007); and soil conservation and management
practices, such as reduced tillage, the incorporation of crop residues, gypsum and manure application, crop
rotation and cover crops to increase soil organic matter, soil water holding capacity and infiltration.
Box 4.4
The traditional Minga system for drought management
Twenty-eight years ago, farmers from the Chiquitania region of Santa Cruz, Bolivia established a community adaption
plan for climate change. As part of the plan, they have developed a practice for harvesting rainwater to cope with the
greater fluctuations in rainfall, as well as the increased concentration and high variability of rains. Using a diversified
production system, they grow maize, cassava, peanuts and organic coffee.
The practice consists in digging a row close to the plants, filling it with manure and then covering it with mulch or
vegetation residues. According to the farmers, this technique has increased their yields and kept production stable
even during droughts. The manure improves the soil structure, thereby increasing water storage. It also increases the
soil’s nutrient content. Currently, this technique is being spread by the Instituto Nacional de Innovación Agropecuaria
y Forestal and FAO to other communities to help them cope with water scarcity resulting from climate change.
Community training
Preparing the manure
Digging the row

Filling the row with manure

Manure-filled row

Covering the surface with residues
Source: R. Vargas based on FAO-ICDS Bolivia, Photos Willy Barba