--- Conservation and Enhancement of Carbon Stocks in Forest, and other Land-Use, and Support Climate-Smart ---

405 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture by combining resources from the GEF Trust Fund and the two trust funds managed by the GEF for adaptation is a distinctive feature of the GEF.” (GEF, 2013a) The GEF-6 CCM draft mentions mitigation in agriculture in general and CSA in particular several times, cu- mulating in the explicit inclusion of CSA as a funding priority under “Objective 2, Programme 2: Promote Conservation and Enhancement of Carbon Stocks in Forest, and other Land-Use, and Support Climate-Smart Agriculture.” In doing so, the GEF-6 strategy acknowledges the “need to go beyond GEF-5 efforts on carbon dioxide emissions and sequestration from the agriculture and forestry sectors and to include activities target- ing the methane and nitrous oxide emissions of these sectors.” The strategy complements this by highlighting its focus on the forest-agriculture nexus as well as the necessary strengthening of MRV of GHG emissions and carbon sequestration in forests and agriculture. The strategy lists the following examples for activities to receive financing under GEF-6: agro-forestry, conservation tillage, livestock management, methane mitiga- tion, irrigation, and fertilizer management. The GEF through its multiple funding channels has thereby fully incorporated CSA in its financing strategy.

This significant shift has implications well beyond the GEF itself. As the financial mechanism of the UNFCCC, the GEF serves as arguably the most important source of examples and experiences for the design of the Green Climate Fund, which is envisioned to also become a UNFCCC financial mechanism. It is still unclear how the GCF will reshape the architecture of funding channels under the UNFCCC (Abbott, 2011; Lattanzio, 2013). Pos- sible options range from the absorption of some or all of the GEF climate finance instruments into the GCF to the coexistence of all funds with the GCF taking an umbrella function, coordinating existing funds under the GEF and representing a middle ground option. However this debate turns out, the substantive upgrading of CSA in the GEF-6 Strategy is likely to be reflected to some degree in the priority setting of the GCF. This means that regardless of the ultimate structure of financing channels, the GCF will represent a clear and direct financing option for CSA activities, presumably with a significantly higher volume than current multilateral funding instruments.

Another pending development, with the outcome regarding CSA less certain, is the result of UNFCCC negotia- tions on the overall structure of the Post-Kyoto carbon finance system and the possible inclusion of carbon credits from REDD+ and agricultural soil sequestration in compliance carbon markets like the European Un- ion’s Emissions Trading System. The Durban Platform agreed upon at COP 17 sets out a roadmap for a Post- Kyoto binding emission reduction agreement to be finalized by 2015 and come into effect in 2020. On REDD+, great efforts have been made over the past years to work towards a comprehensive inclusion of REDD+ issues in the Post-Kyoto framework, potentially opening the door for broader market-based trading of forest carbon credits (Anger, 2008; Platinga, 2008). Initiatives like UN REDD, several Forest Carbon Funds described above as well as bilateral programmes like Australia’s International Forest Carbon Initiative have prepared the ground for an inclusion of REDD+ in compliance carbon markets. Under the Kyoto Protocol, a limit set of afforestation and reforestation are already eligible for the Clean Development Mechanism, albeit with temporary credits of limited fungibility. One other important indicator for the carbon trading potential of forest carbon is the share of REDD+ certificates in voluntary carbon markets. Despite all these positive dynamics, UNFCCC negotiations on REDD+ are difficult and slow. During COP 19 in Doha, no decisions could be reached on REDD+ and intense disagreements on a number of issues, especially related to verification and financing, persist.

The difficult REDD+ situation sends a signal with regard to the inclusion of agricultural carbon sequestration in future global emission agreements. While interest in agricultural GHG emission reductions has generally been increasing in the context of voluntary carbon markets, the share of actual activities remains small. The agricultural sector, with the exception of the established niche of methane avoidance from manure manage- ment, is well behind the forest sector in addressing the methodological barriers and political controversies described in the previous sections. In combination with the great challenges that carbon markets in general are facing today, the trading of agricultural carbon credits is highly unlikely to develop into a significant source of CSA financing in developing countries in the mid-term future.