--- Page 389 ---

• Climate finance can play an important role in meeting the CSA investment gap, but there are some challenges that must be addressed. To date, most public sector climate finance, as well as almost all private sector climate financing, flows into mitigation activities in the industrial and energy sectors.

While the newly established Green Climate Fund (GFC) may shift the balance between mitigation and adaptation funding in the mid-term, currently adaptation financing, a significant part of which is targeted to agriculture activities, is small in comparison to mitigation financing. Consequently, the financing gap for CSA remains large. In addition, the traditional separation of mitigation and adapta- tion in funding sources has hindered investments in activities that generate synergies between the two; a key facet of CSA. • A recent positive developments related to CSA financing is the Global Environment Facility’s (GEF) movement towards combining adaptation and mitigation activities in the draft GEF-6 CCM strategy.

The substantive upgrading of CSA in the GEF-6 Strategy might be reflected to some degree in the pri- ority setting of the GCF. This means that, regardless of the ultimate structure of financing channels, the GCF has the potential to be a clear and direct financing option for CSA activities, presumably with a significantly higher volume than current multilateral funding instruments. • While interest in agricultural GHG emission reductions has been increasing in voluntary carbon markets, the share of actual activities in any carbon market remains small. There are some promis- ing niche markets for agricultural carbon credits, such as methane avoidance from manure manage- ment, fertilizer use efficiency and REDD+ forest certificates. However, because of high transactions costs and a lack of methodologies, together with the challenges that carbon markets are facing in general, carbon finance is unlikely to develop into a significant source of CSA finance in the near future. • For developing countries, changing patterns of climate finance represents an opportunity as well as a challenge. To successfully access, but more importantly, to effectively use increasing volumes of international CSA financing, developing countries will have to ensure that they have fulfilled the necessary prerequisites. Building the CSA evidence base and institutional capacities will be needed to secure a foundation for larger-scale CSA investments.