--- EX-ACT has been developed based on the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and makes use ---

514 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Box 18.5 EX-ACT: assessing the mitigation potential in agriculture and forestry EX-ACT provides ex-ante estimations of the impact of agriculture and forestry development projects on GHG emissions and carbon sequestration. EX-ACT is a land-based accounting system, measuring carbon stocks and stock changes per unit of land, expressed in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2 eqv.) per hectare and year.

The ex-ante carbon balance appraisal guides the project design process and decision making on funding aspects and complements the usual ex-ante economic analysis of investment projects. EX-ACT has the potential to support project designers in selecting project activities with higher benefits both in economic and climate change mitigation terms. EX-ACT outputs can also be used in financial and economic analysis.

EX-ACT has been developed based on the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and makes use of other existing methodologies. The default values for mitigation options in the agriculture sector are mostly from IPCC (2007). EX-ACT consists of a set of linked Microsoft Excel sheets into which project designers insert basic data on land use and management practices foreseen under projects’ activities. EX-ACT adopts a modular approach with each module describing a specific land use. It follows a three-step logical framework:

Figure 18.7 Modular structure and outputs of EX-ACT Deforestation Forest Degradation Afforesatation and Reforestation Non forest Land Use Change Agricolture • Annual crops • Agroforestry/Perennial crops • Irrigated rice Grassland Organic soils and peatlands Other GHG Emissions • Livestock • Inputs • Other investments Soil Climate Ecological zones Description Matrix (synthesis of LULUCF) Sub-Modules Variables and coefficients List IPCC default coefficients Other coefficients Components of the project Related to land areas Modular approach Gross result and C balance (total, per ha, per ha and per year) 1.A general description of the project (geographic area, climate and soil characteristics, duration of the project); 2.Identification of changes in land use and technologies foreseen by project components using specific modules (deforestation, forestation, forest degradation, annual and perennial crops, rice cultivation, grasslands, livestock, inputs, energy); and 3.Computation of the carbon balance with and without the project using IPCC default values and, when available, ad-hoc coefficients.

The main output of the tool consists of the carbon balance resulting from project activities. EX-ACT is an easy, cost- effective tool that requires a minimum amount of data. It includes resources (e.g. tables and maps) that can help users find the information required to run the model. While mainly used at the project level, it can easily be scaled up and be applied at the programme and sector level. It has already been applied to assess agricultural policies or value-chain driven changes in farming systems.

Further information and applications of EX-ACT can be found on the EX-ACT website at FAO, 2012c