--- Source: Isenberg, 2006 ---

367 MODULE 13: Mainstreaming CSA into National Policies and Programmes tions. To track adaptation in food systems, it is often necessary to monitor process and outcomes, as well as impacts. For example, policy-level processes (e.g. the implementation of price and tenure policies) may lead to different outcomes, such as modifications in fertilizer use and more secure land tenure, and have a range of impacts, such as less fertilizer waste and more efficient land use. Finally, monitoring and learning networks contribute to the achievement of the key food system-level objective of more efficient use of scarce resources (Thornton and Lipper, 2013).

A number of countries and programmes have developed Indicators for monitoring the changes in food and agricultural systems the systems. One example is the Climate Investment Funds, which have designed ge- neric result frameworks that are being used for the Strategic Programmes for Climate Resilience developed under the Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (CIF, 2010). These result frameworks use key indicators for monitoring enhanced resilience, including: the presence of adequate early warning systems; changes in land degradation; social protection systems; access to long-term finance; income diversification; and budget allocations to climate-resilient activities. Process indicators include: the existence of sector policies address- ing climate variability and change; the quality of planning processes and the availability of information to the public, including science-based information that incorporates local knowledge.

Within programmes, specific indicators can also be designed for particular project areas. For example, the Co- lombian programme of support to agrosilvopastoral systems (see Box 13.4) has led to reduced temperatures in the project area, lower heat stress for animals and greater productivity. The Ethiopian productive social safety nets programme (see Box 13.9) seeks to address the link between drought and the number of people requiring food aid.

In the United Kingdom the goal is to integrate national adaptation plans and other supported adaptation ac- tions with departmental and ‘whole-government’ development approaches. While this benefits implementa- tion, it makes it difficult to measure the impact of specific actions as opposed to the performance of the whole system. The United Kingdom has responded to these multiple challenges by devising a flexible, multidimen- sional and less costly approach to measuring climate change adaptation (DEFRA, 2010). The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries has also argued for this approach.

Box 13.7 Producing a climate resilient backyard chicken in India Kegg Farms in India has bred a robust and improved dual-purpose backyard chicken. The ‘Kuroiler’ lays 100-150 eggs a year. Native chicken breeds (Desi) lay around 40 eggs a year. In addition, Kuroiler birds grow to 2.5 kilograms in about half the time a native breed needs to reaches 1 kilo. Because the meat is darker and more flavourful, the Kuroiler chickens typically command a premium of about 60 Rupees per kilo over other broiler chickens.

Kegg Farms produces about 16 million day-old chicks a year, which it sells to 1 500 small enterprises. The chicks are then raised for about two weeks before they are inoculated and sold to about 6 500 bicycle salespeople, who in turn sell them to approximately 800 000 farmers. Most of these farmers are women living in some of the remotest parts of the country. The turnover in sales of chicks is about US$ 5 million a year. There is another US$ 5 million turnover from the thousands of small rurally-based businesses that raise and sell the chicks. An independent assessment indicates that the average gross revenue generated per Kuroiler chick (as eggs and meat) is US$ 3.10. With some 16 million chicks distributed annually, the total output is about US$ 50 million, with a net profit of about US$ 10 million.

Profits from the Kuroiler are significantly higher than profits from the native breed. The Kuroiler birds contribute significantly to household cash flow. Women have maintained control over their chicken-growing enterprises as the business has become more commercial.

The success of Kegg Farms is due to several factors. Its chickens are more robust than other chickens; they can scavenge for food and have higher food conversion ratios. They are thus adapted to long periods of drought and can survive with limited nutrition. The company’s business model features a devolved, rural-based distribution system with built-in incentives.

Source: Isenberg, 2006