--- Fund (as CBD ---

397 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture resources. The primary source of AF resources is the sale of Certified Emission Reductions under the Kyoto Protocol’s Clean Development Mechanism with two percent of its proceeds going to the AF. However, with the deflation of carbon markets and the corresponding collapse of Certified Emission Reduction prices in combi- nation with the uncertain shape of the Post-Kyoto emission trading architecture, the financial basis of the AF is being threatened. One response of the AF has been to intensify efforts to increase the share of resources from donor contributions. With this shift, the competition over donor contributions between AF, LDCF and SCCF has increased, while the total resource availability remains tightly constrained.

The continuous lack of total available resources for climate change action in developing countries prompted efforts to overhaul the architecture of climate financing under the UNFCCC. The most visible result of these negotiations is the establishment of the GCF formally created at the Conference of the Parties (COP) 16 in Can- cun. In distinction from other special funds, the GCF is envisioned to become an operating entity of the UNFCCC comparable to the GEF. The creation of the GCF Board as the fund’s governing body as well as the selection of Incheon (South Korea) as host to the GCF represent first steps towards making the GCF operational. The details of the GCF’s operation, its business model, resource mobilization, channels of disbursement as well as fund- ing areas and priorities remain under discussion. The GCF is envisioned to provide US$ 100 billion of climate finance per year by 2020, which would represent a dramatic increase of multilateral funding relative to current resource levels. Potential sources to reach this funding goal are donor contributions, revenues from carbon markets, and private sector funding mobilized through a Private Sector Facility still to be designed. Even if these ambitious funding goals are not realized, the GCF can be expected to fundamentally change the overall architec- ture of global climate finance. The way in which the GCF will relate to the existing funding mechanism under the UNFCCC will influence the shape of international climate financing structures probably for decades to come.

Figure 14.5 Climate finance options under the UNFCCC CBD and UNCCD Kyoto Protocol United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) GEF Trust Fund (as CBD and UNCCD financial mechanism) • Focal Areas Biodiversity and Land Degradation • SFM Incentive Mechanism • Funding combinable with GEF CCM and CCA financing GEF Trust Fund (as operating entity of UNFCCC financial mechanism) • Focal Area on CC Mitigation • Financing for agriculture under LULUCF abjective + funding for biomass • Significant expansion of CSA likely Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) • CC Adaptation financing for non-Annex I countries • Agriculture a funding priority • Combinable with GEF TF • Voluntary donor contributions Least Developed countries fund (LDCF) • CC Adaptation financing for LDCs • Agriculture a funding priority • Combinable with GEF TF • Voluntary donor contributions Green Climate Fund (LDCF) • Future UNFCCC financial mechanism • Envisioned to provide $100 billion annual finacing for CCM & CCA • Details under discussion Adaptation Fund (AF) • CCA financing for developing counries party to the Kyoto Protocol • Not combinable with GEF funds • 2% of CDM proceed plus donations Separate UNFCCC funds managed by GEF Multi Focal Area (MFA) projects Multi Trust-Fund (MTF) projects