--- Page 401 ---

388 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK This suggests that climate-smart agricultural investments with mitigation co-benefits should be identified within the context of existing agricultural investment strategies developed for the purposes of agricultural growth for a specific context. One fairly simple (albeit crude) way of doing that is using the CSA screening methodology described in the previous section. Such a process can identify the potential for agricultural tran- sitions planned for agricultural growth and development to generate mitigation co-benefits. Once these have been identified further analysis to develop a marginal abatement cost curve for agricultural mitigation can be conducted to identify where synergies are most likely to be present.

Figure 14.2 below illustrates an example of such a marginal abatement cost curve developed from screening the Malawi ASWAp described in the preceding section (Branca et al., 2012). The analysis is built upon estimates of the potential mitigation that can be generated from agricultural activities prioritized in the ASWAp and the CSA screening process1. The analysis indicates that several of the planned activities will generate mitigation benefits at no additional cost at the farm level (e.g. activities whose costs are less than zero in the figure). The two activities with high up-front investment costs — agroforestry and water management in drylands— are the ones showing a positive marginal abatement cost, implying the need for external finance (e.g. for the as- sociated mitigation benefits) to support the investment. The width of each step in the marginal abatement cost curve is derived from the magnitude of the targeted activity articulated in the ASWAp. This type of analysis can be useful in obtaining a rough estimate of potential mitigation benefits agricultural investment activities could generate, which can be used both for ranking investments as well as setting targets. This type of analysis can ultimately develop linkages to climate finance with a mitigation focus; however, as noted above, it is essential that it be accompanied by an analysis of the barriers to adoption and investment implications to overcome them, in order to obtain a full understanding of the costs and benefits of the activities.

Figure 14.2 Marginal abatement cost curve for selected CSA practices in Malawi tCO2e abated-year $/tCO2e 1. Agronomy dry 2. Integrated nutrient management dry 3. Tillage/residue mgmt dry 4. Integrated nutrient management moist 5. Tillage/residue mgmt moist 6. Agronomy moist 7. Agroforestry dry 8. Agroforestry moist 9. Water mgmt dry 10.Water mgmt moist -350 -250 -200 -150 -100 -50 0 50 100 150 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 Source: Branca et al., 2012 1 The analysis was conducted using the Ex-Act tool (this tool is also discussed in Module 18). A more complete description of the analy- sis can be found in Branca et al., 2012.