--- in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) Special Report on Emission Scenarios, the range of ---

90 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Water infrastructures generally have a lifetime of 30-50 years. New investments or rehabilitation of old infrastructures are therefore subject to changes in climate. This has serious consequences for people and finances. In particular, the changing frequency and intensity of droughts, floods, and heat waves will affect water supply and demand and call for better protection of land and socio-economic assets. Improving the resilience of water infrastructure to climate change-related shocks and extreme events is a vital part of any effective water investment planning. The concept of robust decision making in water planning (Groves, 2006) acknowledges that is it very difficult to predict the future, and makes extensive use of scenarios to work out decisions that are robust under a variety of alternative futures (Box 3.1). In practical terms, resil- ient coping strategies are those that have the potential to be reasonably effective under the largest possible range of scenarios. This should be complemented with the adaptive management of existing and future water infrastructures, which puts the emphasis on flexible responses and requires strong monitoring and information management systems that allow for periodic upgrading of management plans and activities (UNDP, 2004).

Bottom-up approaches give the opportunity to address vulnerable populations’ needs for resilience and de- velopment. By acknowledging that resilience is closely linked to a population’s state of development, level of economic diversification and the strength of their livelihoods assets, community-based climate change response programmes offer the opportunity to progressively build a capacity to reduce climate change- related risks. Most of the options that will be considered on the basis of bottom-up approaches will not differ from classical agricultural development options for reducing poverty and increasing the standard of living of rural populations. The challenge in this case is to avoid maladaptation (i.e. designing development actions that are excessively sensitive to climate change and will therefore increase the vulnerability of beneficiar- ies). The concept of ‘climate-proof’ investments is central to the design of programmes for reducing climate change-related risks. It will become necessary to maintain a clear perspective on resilience when screening water development programmes. When designing development policies it will be necessary to systemati- cally consider how the policies may be affected by climate change (OECD, 2009). 3.6 Options for adaptation to climate change Options for adaptation to climate change will necessarily combine investments, improved or adaptive man- agement, and modifications in or development of policies, institutions and capacity development. Such op- tions will need to be applied at different scales: on fields and farms; in irrigation schemes (particularly in large schemes); in watersheds or aquifers; in river basins (including transboundary river basins); and at the national level. Table 3.2 lists typical response options and indicates their relevance for different scales.

Box 3.1 Planning under uncertainty The current level of uncertainty associated with the impact of climate change on water availability remains high. The downscaling of global circulation models and local and regional assessments of precipitation patterns produce large variations in the assessment of runoff and aquifer recharge. When combined with the different scenarios presented in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) Special Report on Emission Scenarios, the range of results shows major uncertainties in the prediction of future runoff patterns. A risk-based approach that uses a wide range of scenarios is needed and must be systematically used in hydrological assessments.

Source: Strzepek and McCluskey, 2010