--- This module was written by Claudia Hiepe (FAO) and Patrick Kalas (FAO) with contributions by Federica Mat- ---

487 MODULE 17: Capacity development for climate-smart agriculture 17.4 Conclusions The transition towards CSA practice is a knowledge-intensive learning process involving multiple stakehold- ers. Realizing CSA practice thus requires a holistic and comprehensive CD approach of all stakeholders in- volved, based on good practices such as alignment with and driven by national priorities; incorporating the individual, organizational and enabling environment dimensions of CD; and complementing technical with functional competency to strengthen and apply good learning practices.

Due to the uncertain and dynamic nature of climate change impacts, the module illustrated that this transition towards CSA requires socio-institutional learning processes with a strategic approach to skills development at country level including strong engagement of national and local formal and informal education and training institutions.

This module further illustrated why and how the transition to CSA requires new forms of collaboration and partnerships. Strengthening agricultural innovation systems with public and private research, extension and advisory services plays a key role in generating, documenting, blending and sharing indigenous and scientific knowledge as well as facilitating learning processes and network-based development and innovation. The module further provided concrete examples for improving policy coherence and effectiveness through foster- ing inclusive spaces that promote multi-stakeholder dialogue and enable knowledge sharing and effective learning among a diverse group of stakeholders. The module highlighted that the need to access timely infor- mation and knowledge on climate agriculture will increase, and this need can be addressed through leveraging ICTs, participatory ComDev approaches and knowledge sharing methods directly applicable to CSA.

One area that needs more attention due to the uncertain and dynamic nature of climate change impacts and the complexity of agricultural production systems is the field of monitoring and evaluation (see Module 18 on M&E). Here various frameworks have been piloted in the context of CSA, but more studies are needed to en- sure their applicability for robust decision-making and a sound M&E of complex, socio-institutional learning processes and the question of how to assess capacities and political commitment at country level.

Notes This module was written by Claudia Hiepe (FAO) and Patrick Kalas (FAO) with contributions by Federica Mat- teoli (FAO), Katrin Nichterlein (FAO), Sibyl Nelson (FAO) and Janie Rioux (FAO). Box 17.1 was written by Janie Rioux (FAO). Box 17.5 was written by Sibyl Nelson (FAO). Box 17.8 was written by Karin Nichterlein and the TECA team (FAO). Box 17.9 was written by the CSDI team at FAO including Mario Acunzo, Federica Matteoli, Marzia Pafumi and Vanessa Vertiz.