--- Page 261 ---

248 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 10.2 Climate-smart approaches Strategies for developing climate-smart approaches for fisheries and aquaculture are broadly similar to those for other sectors. As described elsewhere in this sourcebook, these strategies are connected with most, if not all, of the major cross-cutting themes of development and environment. As in other sectors, a number of issues need to be recognised and reconciled in order for the ‘climate-smart’ approach to become the default approach for development. Key considerations include the need to: • respond to considerable increases in global demand for aquatic food in the face of climate change and other factors, and address specific issues of food access and livelihoods, across the entire supply, value and benefit chains; • absorb effectively emerging technologies and adapt to market and socially driven changes within and around the sector; Box 10.2 Global mapping of national economies’ vulnerability to climate change impacts through fisheries Following the IPCC definition of vulnerability and using available data, national economies’ relative vulnerability to climate change impacts through their fisheries was calculated for 132 countries. The analysis revealed that 16 African least developed countries (LDC) and three Asian LDC were among the highly vulnerable countries. Unfortunately, limited data precluded many small island developing states from being included in the analysis. However, given their high dependence on fisheries, low adaptive capacity and high exposure to extreme events, they are also likely to be among the more vulnerable countries.

While many African marine coastal fisheries are not likely to face huge physical impacts, the region’s adaptive capacity to respond to climate change is relatively low and fish consumption high. As a result, economies there are highly vulnerable even to minor changes in climate and temperature. In the northern hemisphere, Russian and Ukrainian economies were ranked highly vulnerable due to a predicted high degree of warming impacting fisheries in this region and low adaptive capacities.

Sources: Allison et al., 2009 and Daw et al., 2009