--- financing through separate funds, the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) and the Special Climate Change ---

395 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture UNFCCC The first category entails climate finance options for CSA directly connected to the UNFCCC (see Figure 14.5).

The Global Environment Facility (GEF) serves as one of the “entities operating the financial mechanism” of the UNFCCC. Through the GEF Trust Fund, donor countries provide financing to cover the incremental cost devel- oping countries incur when undertaking activities that create global environmental benefits. Climate change mitigation, as a particularly clear-cut case of global environmental benefits, represents one of the GEF’s larg- est focal areas. Climate change adaptation activities are not funded under the GEF Trust Fund, but receive financing through separate funds, the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) and the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) described in detail below.

The GEF Focal Area Strategies3 provide the basis for GEF funding priorities. In line with the small role agri- culture traditionally holds within international mitigation financing, activities reducing GHG emissions from agriculture are not particularly highlighted under the current GEF Strategy (GEF, 2007). Nevertheless, the GEF Trust Fund provides funding opportunities for agricultural GHG reductions, most importantly under Focal Area Objective Climate Change Mitigation (CCM)-5 on the promotion of the conservation and enhancement of carbon stocks through sustainable management of land use, land-use change and forestry. The current GEF strategy puts an emphasis on sustainable forest management, which connects to CSA practices under the broader landscape approach. In addition, the objective includes the enhancement of carbon stocks in non-forest lands, making CSA mitigation activities in a narrow sense eligible for GEF Trust Fund financing. Another niche for agricultural activities within the current GEF Strategy is the financing of biomass applications under the re- newable energy objective (CCM-3). Overall, agriculture does not play a prominent role in the current GEF CCM Strategy. However, this situation is likely to change with the new upcoming GEF Strategy on CCM, which is likely to put an explicit focus on CSA (see section below on “Prospective development in climate finance for CSA”).

In addition to the financing provided through the GEF Trust Fund, the UNFCCC has established several addi- tional funds. The LDCF and the SCCF, both established in 2001, are managed by the GEF and have developed into one of the central global financing options for climate change adaptation activities. The LDCF’s original mandate was to provide full cost financing to least developed countries4 for the formulation of National Ad- aptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs). By now, practically all eligible countries have accessed their funds for NAPA preparation. Therefore the LDCF has shifted its focus towards the implementation of projects that respond to NAPA priorities. As agriculture is arguably the sector most vulnerable to climate change impacts, it is a priority for NAPA implementation in most countries. Consequently, agriculture is the main sector receiv- ing LDCF funding. Following the GEF’s own classification, 28 percent of the US$ 537 million LDCF resources dispersed to date were allocated to agricultural adaptation activities. A closer examination of LDCF and other NAPA related projects suggests that this percentage is actually much higher, as most LDCF projects across all categories are in fact “mainly related to agriculture” (Meybeck, 2013). Accordingly, the LDCF represents one of the most important sources for the adaptation aspects of CSA activities in least developed countries.

Only least developed countries are eligible to access LDCF funding. Other developing countries have to rely on funding from the SCCF. The SCCF formally features a broad mandate covering practically all aspects of climate change adaptation and mitigation. De facto, the SCCF has developed into a funding source for climate change adaptation activities accessible to non-least developed countries5. As in the LDCF, agriculture is one of the main target sectors for SCCF funding. More than half of total SCCF resources (US$ 189 million mobilized by June 2012) were dispersed to projects in agriculture, land management, and water management. The adapta- tion aspects of CSA activities thus connect directly to SCCF priorities. However, the SCCF particularly suffers from the limitation of overall financial resources and the unpredictability of finance availability. Other than 3 GEF Focal Area Strategies are effective for the respective four-year long GEF replenishment period. The current replenishment period, GEF-5, extends from July 1st 2010 through June 30th 2014. On July 1st 2014, the new GEF Focal Area Strategies for the GEF-6 replen- ishment period are expected to come into effect. 4 For a list of eligible least developed countries see GEF, 2011, p. 8. 5 Least developed countries are also eligible for SCCF funding, but in most cases choose to use the often more readily available re- sources provided by the LDCF.