--- Contour terraces in the Peruvian Andes ---

73
MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems
Case study 2.8
Planning and management for the hydrological balance of the South
American continent – the role of the tropical Andes
©FAO/I. Velez
Contour terraces in the Peruvian Andes
Introduction
Most of the watersheds of the South American continent, including the Amazon and La Plata river basins, originate in the
tropical Andes mountain range. Water places the tropical Andes in a position of strategic importance for the environmental
stability of the entire South American continent.
Climate change is a significant threat to the functioning of the tropical Andes’ ecosystems. Throughout rural Latin America,
and particularly in the tropical Andes and its related continental watersheds, agriculture and livestock production are the
main livelihoods of most rural populations. As they are currently practiced, agriculture and livestock production have a
huge impact on the hydrological regime and water quality downstream.

The landscape approach
At the farm level, shifting to climate-smart practices, improving market access, and protecting vegetation cover on the
landscape level to stop soil erosion, are some of the key measures that need to be taken across the tropical Andes to avoid
environmental damage and strenthen rural livelihoods.
Policy and institutional reforms are needed to ensure that the high-altitude ecosystems of the topical Andes are managed
to ensure hydrological stability. Planning, development and management of water resources must be governed by an
integrated local and continental perspective, and encompass climate change adaptation, disaster risk management and
natural resource management. Institutions should be adapted to serve the resource, not the other way around.
On the continental scale, a South American plurinational agency that works to clarify roles and responsibilities in relation
to the sustainable water management of the region´s watersheds could be an important positive force for long-term water
security of the region.
On the national level, a basin perspective is often lacking. State authorities usually work in isolation, and there is a repeatedly
acknowledged absence of national policies for water resources in the region. To a large degree, the solutions involve public
policies that encourage the adoption of environmentally sustainable agricultural practices. These practices should be