--- Risk Reduction of the Southern Africa Development Community and the Regional Platform for Disaster Risk ---

437 MODULE 15: Disaster Risk Reduction: Strengthening Livelihood Resilience Since the above example of the Philippines is recent, it remains to be seen how it will translate into practice.

Nonetheless, it illustrates an effective approach, based on an understanding of the multidimensional nature of risks, to improve coherence at the highest government level through explicit legislation and national policy with concrete strategies that better harmonize risk reduction and adaptation objectives.

Region-wide platforms and inter-governmental strategies for DRR DRR initiatives at regional levels also offer great potential for collaborative arrangements and for catalysing CSA. Worldwide, there are six regional platforms on DRR in place, such as the Regional Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction of the Southern Africa Development Community and the Regional Platform for Disaster Risk Box 15.9 The enabling environments in the Philippines integrating DRR and CCA The Philippines is the third most-disaster-prone country in the world. The country has the highest number of people exposed to natural disasters and displaced annually as a result of these disasters (UNISDR, 2009a). The country is prone to earthquakes and tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, drought and typhoons that trigger secondary effects, such as landslides, floods, flash flooding and storm surges. The Philippines is also affected by the periodic occurrence of El Niño and La Niña events. Many areas are exposed to multiple hazards: 22.3 percent of the land area is exposed to three or more hazards and 62.2 percent is exposed to two or more. The Philippines is expected to experience substantial rise in sea levels, with seventy percent of the 1 500 municipalities located along the coast vulnerable.

Agriculture represents one-fifth of the total economy (18 percent of its gross domestic product) and generates one- third of national employment.

In 2010, the country enacted a Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act, which included a policy to mainstream DRR and climate change into socio-economic development planning, budgeting, and governance, including the agriculture sector. Under the Act, Local Government Units (LGUs) are now obliged to use at least 5 percent of their budgets for DRR. The formulation of a disaster risk reduction and management plan by the LGUs forms the basis for the disbursement of the funds. The country also has a Strategic National Action Plan (SNAP) on DRR 2009-2019, which spells out the road-map for DRR. The Plan’s overall goal is to contribute to the country’s sustainable development and poverty alleviation agenda (Republic of the Philippines National Disaster Coordinating Council, 2009).

The Philippine´s Climate Change Act was enacted in 2009. The first of its kind in Southeast Asia, the Act recognizes that climate change and DRR are closely interrelated and that effective disaster risk reduction will enhance climate change adaptive capacity (UNISDR, 2011a). The Act mentions that “…the State shall integrate disaster risk reduction into climate change programs and initiatives”.

The Act also establishes a Climate Change Commission attached to the Office of the President and an advisory board composed of all relevant line Ministries, with the provision that “At least one of the sectoral representatives shall come from the disaster risk reduction community” (Republic of the Philippines, 2009). Among the functions of the Commission is ensuring the “…mainstreaming of climate change, in synergy with disaster risk reduction, into the national, sectoral and local development plans and programs”, and partnership with the National Disaster Coordinating Council in order to increase efficiency and effectiveness…” (Republic of the Philippines, 2009).

The National Framework Strategy on Climate Change 2010-2022 recognizes that the Philippines “faces increasing disaster risks with geological/seismic dangers closely interacting with...meteorological hazards”. The Strategy integrates DRR, including the enhancement of monitoring, forecasting and hazard warning systems, and mainstreams DRR and climate change adaptation into development and land-use planning based on disaster risk assessments.

Similarly, the national Development Plan identifies three goals for the agriculture sector, one of which is to increase “sector resilience to climate change risks” (Republic of the Philippines National Economic and Development Authority, 2011), which will include: • reducing climate change-related risks and the vulnerability of natural ecosystems and biodiversity; • increasing the resilience of agriculture communities through the development of climate change-sensitive technologies, climate-resilient agricultural infrastructure and climate-responsive food production systems; • strengthening the agriculture and fisheries insurance system as an important risk sharing mechanism; • incorporating natural hazards and climate risk in the agricultural land use plan; • strengthening the capacity of communities to respond effectively to climate risks and natural hazards; and • continuing vulnerability and adaptation assessments, especially in food production areas.

Source: Republic of the Philippines, 2009