--- the Jammu & Kashmir MAP Growers’ Cooperative ---

332 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Private sector institutions As markets become increasingly important in developing economies, private sector actors also become sig- nificant providers of research and development, education and extension services.

When seeking private sector support for CSA initiatives, it is important to bear in mind that the private sector’s main priorities are profit and public perception. CSA works to establish a ‘triple win’ scenario in which innova- tive practices produce higher yields, build resilience to climate change (reducing long-term risks) and lower carbon emissions all along the supply chain. By contributing to CSA, private businesses can enhance their brand recognition among key suppliers and consumers. Key private sector actors and the possible support they might provide to CSA initiatives include:

Individual farmers Household farms and smallholder farmers are of course private sector actors themselves. As it takes too much time and too many resources to reach each individual farmer, approaching producer cooperatives is a good strategy to build a broad base of support for climate-smart practices in the farming community. The effectiveness of word-of-mouth communication among farmers should not be underestimated. Enlisting and maintaining the support of individual farmer ‘focal points’ or ‘local champions’ is advisable.

Producer cooperatives Producers’ cooperatives and unions are intended to reflect producers’ interests. Along with providing or coor- dinating demand-driven extension to their members, farmer cooperatives and unions also represent stake- holder interests on a political level. However, such organizations are open to manipulation by governments and elites. Limited in capacity, most cooperatives have little influence on public policy decisions by their members.

Nevertheless, close collaboration with producers’ cooperatives or unions has high potential payoffs, as their legitimacy and influential capacity reaches wide networks of farmers (see Box 12.6).

Box 12.6 Adapting to climate change by growing medicinal plants: the Jammu & Kashmir MAP Growers’ Cooperative In the Baramulla, Bandipora and Pulwama districts of Kashmir, India, smallholder farmers who traditionally cultivate maize are facing increasingly unpredictable rains, snowfall, temperatures and humidity. With debt from repeated crop failures on the rise, and average annual incomes barely totalling 110 USD per hectare, many have been forced to sell their land to developers and abandon farming.

The Jammu & Kashmir Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Growers’ Cooperative, formed in 2009, has demonstrated the viability and profitability of growing lavender, which can be grown on what is locally called ‘kandi’ (semi-barren, rainfed farmland). Lavender can yield USD 4 000 in yearly profit, has a 20-year lifespan and demands minimal input.

It is highly resilient, almost pest-free and unappealing to grazing cattle. Furthermore, legal cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants in India is a crucial step towards preserving natural biodiversity. Over 90 percent of medicinal and aromatic plants currently traded are sourced from the wild, and two-thirds of these are harvested by destructive methods.

The Cooperative has grown from 30 to 300 farmers since 2009. With government support, the Cooperative delivers planting materials and provides training. As members, small holder farmers are able to market and even export their products through the Cooperative and demand fair prices. Since 2009, collective harvests have been steadily rising.

In 2009, the Cooperative set up a half million dollar, aromatic oil distillation plant with a grant from the federal government. The unit now gets enough flowers to operate through the May-December season. Marketing linkages have been established within India and in Britain, and the Cooperative is now marketing essential oils of lavender, rose and geranium under the brand name ‘Pure Aroma’.

The switch to low-risk, high-value aromatic and medicinal crops that thrive in the soil and unpredictable climate of the Kashmir region has given farmers new market opportunities and provided a more reliable source of income.

Source: UNFCCC, 2013a