--- GEF/SCCF Multi-Trust Fund projects ---

396 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK the GEF Trust Fund, which is replenished for four year periods, the LDCF and SCCF rely on voluntary ad hoc contributions from donor countries, making the planning of resource allocation difficult. While the situation is less problematic for the LDCF as it receives an overall higher volume of resources, it makes the availability of resources for SCCF activities highly uncertain, increasing the risk for countries and implementing agencies of conducting the laborious process of project preparation in vain.

One aspect that makes GEF managed funding channels especially suitable for the financing of CSA activi- ties is their combinability in form of Multi Focal Area and Multi Trust Fund activities. The GEF hosts resource channels for climate change mitigation and adaptation under one roof. In addition, the GEF also serves as a financial mechanism for other international environmental conventions like the Convention on Biological Diversity or the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and in this function provides funds for biodiversity conservation, sustainable land management and other environmental concerns. All of these GEF funding channels are combinable, meaning that one project can access funding from different GEF channels for the respective aspects of the activity. As an integrated approach to agricultural development, CSA empha- sizes the utilization of synergies. The combinability of GEF financing options provides opportunities to translate the integrative nature of CSA into additional financing. The combination of mitigation and adaptation funding in Multi-Trust Fund initiatives, merging GEF Trust Fund with LDCF/SCCF resources, corresponds most directly with CSA activities (see Box 14.1). For some CSA initiatives a combination of funding from different GEF focal areas like biodiversity or land degradation might also be an option. The combination of funding from different focal areas is especially incentivized for activities on Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) through the SFM/ Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) Incentive Mechanism (GEF, 2010).

In addition to LDCF and SCCF, the UNFCCC created another fund to address adaptation needs of non-Annex I countries: the Adaptation Fund (AF), established in 2001 under the Kyoto Protocol. The AF began operations in 2007. Since then 28 projects with a total volume of US$ 184 million have been approved. The GEF provides secretariat services to the AF, but its governing body, the Adaptation Fund Board, is separate from the GEF governance structure and hence, the AF follows distinct policies. The most significant difference is the prin- ciple of direct access. For most GEF Trust Fund or LDCF/SCCF financed activities, developing countries have to partner with one of the ten GEF Agencies6, which are accredited to apply for GEF funding and implement the respective project. The AF instead emphasizes the direct access to resources by National Implementing Entities in the recipient countries. At present, 15 National Implementing Entities are accredited to apply for AF funding. In addition, the AF has accredited ten Multilateral Implementing Entities as well as one Regional Implementing Entity. The most significant challenge the AF currently faces is the future inflow of financial 6 The ten GEF Agencies are: World Bank Group, Inter-American Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, African Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, UN Development Program, UN Environment Program, UN Food and Agri- culture Organization, UN Industrial Development Organization, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development.

Box 14.1 GEF/SCCF Multi-Trust Fund projects The FAO/GEF Multi-Trust Fund project on Promotion of Climate-smart Livestock Management Integrating Reversion of Land Degradation and Reduction of Desertification in Vulnerable Provinces combines GEF Trust Fund and SCCF funds for an integrated approach to increase multiple benefits needed in the livestock sector in Ecuador.

The proposed project is particularly innovative because it seeks to harness the synergies between sustainable land management, climate change mitigation, and climate change adaptation. Climate-smart livestock management (CSLM) integrates both climate change adaptation and mitigation practices in the agro-livestock sector, while enhancing the achievement of national food security and development goals. The overall GEF financing of US$ 3.86 million, which includes US$ 1.46 million from the SCCF, will support interventions to reduce soil degradation, increase adaptive capacity to climate change, and mitigate GHG emissions by implementing cross-sectorial policies and climate-smart livestock management, with emphasis on vulnerable provinces.

Source: GEF, 2013b