--- This module was written by Hideki Kanamaru (FAO) and Jim Hancock (FAO) with contributions from Louis Bockel ---

534 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 18.7 Conclusions Assessments for policy and project design are conducted during the conceptualization and preparation steps of a CSA project’s planning. They provide situation analyses, clarify central problems and threats, and identify effec- tive CSA measures. Monitoring and evaluation include: setting project baselines, defining indicators, measuring progress, and evaluating successes and problems of CSA interventions at the end of the project and beyond.

There are two major types of assessments for CSA policy and project design: climate impact assessments and CSA options assessments. Climate impact assessments characterize the changing local climate, the expected impacts on agriculture and the vulnerability (or resilience) of livelihoods. CSA options assessments can identify the options that will be more effective in achieving CSA objectives.

Monitoring and evaluation are initiated during the project preparation stage of the project cycle and are closely linked with the overall CSA planning. Monitoring tracks progress, checks intermediate results, and informs ad- justments during the project implementation. Evaluation deals primarily with the assessment of the results and impacts of CSA interventions. The learning process identifies issues and draws lessons for future interventions and policies and should be integrated into the monitoring and evaluation process. The monitoring and evaluation framework presented in this module has six major elements: situational analysis and forecasting; intervention planning and targeting, and defining detailed indicators; implementation and monitoring; evaluation; monitoring and evaluation as closely related activities; and the importance of learning. The interventions should be designed within a results-based framework with particular emphasis on the development of appropriate indicators.

There are eight unique challenges for assessment, monitoring and evaluation for CSA: the difficulty of setting the goals and an agreed definition of CSA; the multi-sectoral nature of CSA and the involvement of various stakehold- ers; the issues of scale, leakage, permanency, externality and ancillary impact; the difficulty of obtaining quality data and information; the uncertainties with data, information, and methods; difficulty of attribution; inadequate capacity and resources; and the practicality of methods and tools. Most of the guiding principles for responding to these challenges are common to any assessment, monitoring and evaluation activity for CSA.

CSA practitioners are expected to use the guidance outlined in this module as a starting point for designing a more specific approach that satisfies the needs and context of a CSA plan and take into account the guiding principles.

Notes This module was written by Hideki Kanamaru (FAO) and Jim Hancock (FAO) with contributions from Louis Bockel (FAO), Ademola Braimoh (World Bank), Elisa Distefano (IFAD), Wiebke Förch (CCAFS), Uwe Grewer (FAO), Claudia Hiepe (FAO), Madeleine Jonsson (Swedish Cooperative Centre), Krishna Krishnamurthy (WFP), Sarshen Marais (Conservation South Africa), Federica Matteoli (FAO), Katia Medeiros (FAO), Sibyl Nelson (FAO), Christina Seeberg- Elverfeldt (FAO), Philip Thornton (CCAFS), Ophelie Touchemoulin (SAUR) and Tamara Vantwout (FAO). Figure 18.8 was created by Uwe Grewer (FAO). Box 18.1 was written by Hideki Kanamaru (FAO) with material provided by Christina Seeberg-Elverfeldt (FAO). Box 18.2 was written by Wiebke Förch (CCAFS) and Philip Thornton (CCAFS).

Box 18.3 was written by Elisa Distefano (IFAD). Box 18.5 was written by Uwe Grewer (FAO), Ophelie Touchemoulin (SAUR) and Louis Bockel (FAO). Box 18.6 was written by Kanamaru with material provided by Sarshen Marais (Conservation South Africa). Box 18.7 was written by Madeleine Jonsson (Swedish Cooperative Centre). Box 18.8 was written by Hideki Kanamaru (FAO) with material provided by Tamara Vantwout (FAO). Box 18.10 was written by Hideki Kanamaru (FAO) with material provided by Federica Matteoli (FAO) and Madeleine Jonsson (Swed- ish Cooperative Centre). Box 18.11 was written by Hideki Kanamaru (FAO) with material provided by Christina Seeberg-Elverfeldt (FAO). Case Study 18.1 was written by Krishna Krishnamurthy (WFP). Case Studies 18.2 and 18.3 were written by Ademola Braimoh (World Bank).