--- Page 35 ---

22 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Sustainable management of forests (Braatz, 2012) and sustainable management of fisheries (De Young, 2012) are good examples of where the actions towards increasing resilience in one domain of vulnerability, starting with the biophysical domain, also have positive effects on the resilience and vulnerability in other domains (social and economic). Landscape approaches can play an important role in building resilience (HLPE, 2012a).

Social protection can play an important role in increasing resilience at household and community level. This is especially true if national systems are designed as comprehensive programmes that exploit the synergies be- tween various instruments in such a way as to cover the specific needs of various groups, especially the more vulnerable, and to be easily scaled up to address any kind of shock (HLPE, 2012b).

The notion of resilience is particularly powerful for bringing together interventions that cover different dimen- sions. Improving the sustainability of forest management not only increases the forest’s resilience, but also contributes to improving water management, protecting the soil from erosion and to conserving agrobiodiver- sity (e.g. by providing habitat to pollinators). In this way, improvements in the sustainability of forest manage- ment contribute to improving the resilience of farming systems. As mentioned earlier, landscape approaches can play an important role in that respect (HLPE, 2012a). Forestry and fisheries provide complementary food and income and in so doing contribute to improving the resilience of households and food systems. This no- tion also helps clarify the relations between ‘specific’ vulnerabilities and resilience and how addressing known risks can allow for the creation of strategies to build general resilience to cope with uncertainty. As such, resilience provides an efficient way for implementing ‘no regret’ adaptation. A crucial element would be to better manage known risks, whether climatic or not, to increase preparedness to future, uncertain risks and changes.

Efficiency and resilience Efficiency and resilience should be pursued together and at various scales in different agricultural systems and food chains. Being efficient without being resilient will not be helpful over the long term, given that shocks will occur more often due to climate change. Being resilient without being efficient or without allowing for an increase in production, will pose problems for ensuring food security over the long term and for supporting livelihoods. In the pursuit of these two goals, there might be trade-offs, but there will also be synergies. In- creasing efficiency could lead to greater sensitivity to certain shocks. For example, more productive livestock is more sensitive to heat waves (Hoffmann, 2010). On the other hand, increased efficiency can be a factor in increasing resilience. For example, increasing production in food importing countries will improve their resil- ience to price volatility. Increasing soil carbon stocks, enhancing diversity in the field and improving trade are of particular interest with regard to improving efficiency and resilience of food systems.

Increasing soil carbon stocks Increasing soil organic carbon improves both efficiency and resilience. It improves nutrient and water intake by plants, which increases yields and resource efficiency of land, nutrients and water. It also reduces soil erosion and increases water retention, especially as it is often combined with added soil cover, as in conservation agri- culture. This combination makes the system more resilient to variability of precipitation and to extreme events.

Increasing carbon sinks in the soils also captures carbon, which contributes to climate change mitigation. For all these reasons, restoring degraded lands and increasing the level of organic carbon in soils is a priority ac- tion (IPCC, 2007b; FAO, 2009b; FAO, 2010a; HLPE, 2012a).