--- Page 231 ---

218 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK GHG emissions to be inversely related to productivity. At very low levels of milk production (200 kg per cow per year) emissions were found to be 12 kg CO2 eqv./kg FPCM compared to 1.1 kg CO2 eqv./kg FPCM for high pro- duction levels (about 8 000 kg of milk). This reflects the strong relationship between livestock intensification and GHG emissions on a global scale (Gerber et al., 2011).

Climate-smart livestock Overall principles Resource use efficiency Given the current and projected scarcity of resources and the anticipated increase in demand for livestock products, there is considerable agreement that increasing efficiency in resource use is a key component to improving the sector’s environmental sustainability. More efficient use of natural resources is a crucial strat- egy for decoupling growth in the livestock sector from adverse environmental impacts. Efficiency in the use of natural resources is measured by the ratio between the use of natural resources as input to the production activities and the output from production (e.g. kg of phosphorus used per unit of meat produced, or hectares of land mobilized per unit of milk produced). The concept can be extended to the amount of emissions generated by unit of output (e.g. GHG emissions per unit of eggs produced). Examples of opportunities that fall within this strategy are higher yields per hectare, higher water productivity, higher feed efficiency, improved management of manure and fertilizers and reduced losses along the food chain (Westhoek et al., 2011).

Improving the feed-to-food conversion efficiency in animal production systems is a fundamental strategy for improving the environmental sustainability of the sector. A large volume of food is wasted even before it reach- es the consumer. A recent FAO (2011) study suggests that about one-third of food produced is wasted. Reduc- tion of waste along the animal food chain can substantially contribute to reducing the demand for resources, such as land, water, energy, as well as other inputs, such as nutrients.

The current prices of inputs, such as land, water and feed, used in livestock production often do not reflect true scarcities. Consequently, there is the overutilization of resources by the sector and inefficiencies in production processes. Any future policies to protect the environment will have to introduce adequate market pricing for natural resources. Ensuring effective management rules and liability, under private or communal ownership of the resources, is a further necessary policy element for improving the use of resources.

Building resilience: buffering and risk management at farm and system level Traditionally, livestock producers have been able to adapt to various environmental and climatic changes.

Now however, expanding populations, urbanization, economic growth, increased consumption of animal-based foods and greater commercialisation have made traditional coping mechanisms less effective (Sidahmed, 2008). As a result, the identification of coping and risk management strategies has become very important.

Particularly in pastoral and agro-pastoral systems, livestock are key assets held by poor people and fulfil mul- tiple economic, social, and risk management functions. Livestock is also a crucial coping mechanism in varia- ble environments. As this variability increases, livestock will become more valuable. For many poor people, the loss of livestock assets means a collapse into chronic poverty and has long-term effects on their livelihoods.

A wide array of adaptation options is available (see, for instance, Kurukulasuriya and Rosenthal, 2003; IPCC, 2007). Possible adaptive responses include: technological options (e.g. more drought-tolerant crops); behav- ioural modifications (e.g. changes in dietary choices); managerial choices (e.g. different farm management practices); and policy alternatives (e.g. planning regulations and infrastructural development). Some options may be appropriate for the short-term, others for the long-term (or both). In the short-term, adaptation to cli- mate change is often framed within the context of risk management (see Module 15 on disaster risk reduction).

Washington et al. (2006) outline an approach for addressing the challenges of climate change that depends on a