--- Source: FAO, 2011 ---

202 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK mites and other animals living in the soil. This microfauna takes over the task of tillage and builds soil porosity and structure. It incorporates organic matter from the soil surface; the excrements provide stable soil aggre- gates and the vertical macro-pores created by worms serve as drainage channels for excess water. This makes the land less susceptible to flooding and erosion, since it improves the infiltration of water into the ground. The organic matter incorporated by soil microfauna into the soil improves soil structure and water storage capacity, which in turn helps plants to survive longer during drought spells. Both are important strategies for farming adaptations to changing climate effects and contribute to mitigation efforts. By managing biological processes, conservation agriculture can contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation by reducing GHG emissions and sequestering carbon (FAO, 2012c).

Increased levels of organic matter in soil also help mitigate climate change by storing carbon from atmos- pheric CO2 in soil organic matter. The formation of stable organic matter through the process of humification is mediated by soil micro-organisms. Another element of biological tillage is the introduction of crops, in- cluding trees and shrubs, with deep penetrating tap-roots. Some ‘pioneer’ crops, such as lupine, jack-beans (canavalia) or radish, can break subsoil compactions if, for example, they are planted in the crop rotation or intercropped as green manure cover crops (FAO, 2009a). 7.5 Climate-smart approaches and practices To achieve SCPI, all aspects of sustainability (social, economic, political and environmental) must be taken into consideration in conjunction with the overall context. Global, regional and national instruments, treaties, con- ventions, codes and policies are an essential component in the enhancement and sustainable use of natural resources. Policies at, or that impact, the sub-national and local levels— as well as institutional capacity— are also important for addressing local social, economic and agro-ecological conditions (see Module 12 on institu- tions and Module 13 on policies). Improving market linkages, reducing post-harvest losses (see Module 11 on post-harvest practices) and conserving agricultural biodiversity will also contribute to ensuring that improved farming practices deliver the anticipated benefits.

At the field level, there are a wide range of agricultural practices and approaches that are currently available that can contribute to increased production while still focusing on environmental sustainability. It needs to be emphasized that outlining these is not a blueprint of actions that can be undertaken in all agro-ecosystems.

What this module does is present options of management practices and approaches that— considering the ecological, social, policy and economic dimensions of a specific location— can contribute to climate-smart crop production. These practices and approaches for crop production can provide adaptation measures and/ or mitigation benefits.

Box 7.6 Conservation agriculture with ripper-furrower system in Namibia Farmers in the north of Namibia are using conservation agriculture practices to grow drought-tolerant crops, including millet, sorghum and maize. The farming system uses a tractor-drawn ripper-furrower to rip the hard pan to a depth of 60 centimetres and to form furrows for in-field rainfall harvesting. The harvested water is concentrated in the root zone of crops, which are planted in the rip lines together with a mixture of fertilizer and manure. Tractors are used in the first year to establish the system. From the second year onwards, farmers plant crops directly into the rip lines using an animal-drawn direct seeder.

Crop residues are consumed mainly by livestock, but the increased biomass produced by the system also provides some residues for soil cover. Farmers are encouraged to practice crop rotation with legumes. These techniques lengthen the growing season and improve soil structure, fertility and moisture retention. Average maize yields have increased from 300 kilograms per hectare to more than 1.5 tonnes.

Source: FAO, 2011