--- Page 398 ---

385 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture tem itself (e.g. there are synergies between mitigation and agricultural returns) the opportunity costs are negative or very low (FAO, 2009). For example, restoring degraded grazing lands can generate a net posi- tive return to grazing activities – as well as generate mitigation. In this sense the mitigation cost would be considered zero, or even negative (e.g. the positive return to grazing could be considered a negative cost to mitigation). Two key features of sustainable agricultural intensification strategies that increase agricultural returns offer the potential to capture significant mitigation co-benefits: increasing resource use efficiency and increasing carbon stocks in soils and above-ground biomass (e.g. trees and perennials).

However it is important to recognize the shortcomings in adopting this approach. First of all, the returns to agricultural activities that also generate positive mitigation benefits vary considerably across agro-ecologi- cal and socio-economic conditions, so broad estimates of positive returns need to be carefully scrutinized in more specific contexts. Soil type, rainfall patterns, farming systems and input and output market conditions are all key determinants of the returns. Secondly, the costs of transitioning to the agricultural activity with mitigation benefits can be quite significant, involving the need for institutional and infrastructural invest- ments that are generally not fully included in the opportunity cost assessment. The costs of having an ef- fective extension service, road transport and input supply that would be essential to achieve higher returns under an improved practice are generally not included in opportunity cost analysis of mitigation activities which would look only at farm level returns. The importance of having such an enabling environment and the implications for agricultural investments can be seen from the experience in recent decades of promoting sustainable agriculture. Often, these efforts have not resulted in the scale of adoption and transformation envisioned, because the necessary enabling environment was not in place (FAO, 2011c).

A final and important cost issue to consider when looking at the potential response of agricultural producers to mitigation payments, is that the transaction costs of participating in such a programme are not included and they can be a significant barrier, particularly where fairly stringent measurement, reporting and verifi- cation (MRV) requirements are needed to access financing (FAO, 2009 and 2011b). This issue is particularly important when looking at the potential of carbon market finance for smallholder agriculture (FAO, 2011b).

It is also one of the reasons that public sector mitigation finance integrated into agricultural financing chan- nels is considered a more viable option for scaling up mitigation financing in many developing country con- texts.

The table below, Table 14.4, summarizes some of the potential synergies and trade-offs that may arise in implementing agricultural activities that have high mitigation potential. The left hand column in the table (changes in agricultural systems) refers to activities identified by the IPCC fourth assessment report as ma- jor potential sources of mitigation potential. The columns to the right then summarize potential impacts on crop/agricultural returns, as well as potential effects on the variability of returns, which is a key element of adaptation. The table gives illustrative examples only, but indicates that while there is considerable potential to capture synergies between productivity, stability and mitigation from changes in agricultural systems, there is also considerable potential for trade-offs to arise in specific contexts.