--- Communication for Development Strategies and Tools in Community Based ---

486
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
A ComDev approach can also improve the effectiveness of local or national climate change and food security
initiatives. It does so by facilitating knowledge exchange and learning among different stakeholders, improving
participation and coordination, matching supply and demand for adaptation support services and contributing to
mediation in conflict situations (see Box 17.9).
Box 17.9
Communication for Development Strategies and Tools in Community Based
Climate Change Adaptation
Context
In 2008, FAO and the Italian Ministry for the Environment and Territory jointly launched the Communication for
Sustainable Development Initiative (CSDI), an inter-regional project aimed at promoting ComDev as a means
of improving adaptation to climate change, sustainable natural resource management, and food security. CSDI
has developed ComDev strategies and services in Bangladesh, Bolivia, the Congo, Jamaica and the Caribbean
region, focusing on strengthening rural knowledge and enhancing local institutions’ capacities in this field. With
the aim to strengthen and scale up related communication services, CSDI has supported the implementation of
communication platforms, virtual consultations and publications to enhance dialogue and knowledge exchanges
at the regional and global levels. For example, in collaboration with the Bolivian Ministry of Rural Development
and Land, CSDI developed a National ComDev Plan. This supports the National Institute for Innovation in
Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry (INIAF) in designing and implementing communication strategies and services
for agricultural innovation and rural development.
Methodology
Three pilot areas were identified in Bolivia, based on INIAF´s priorities: Yapacaní and the Norte Integrado Region,
Yacuiba and Chiquitanía. Participatory processes at the local level were based on three main components:
1.A participatory communication appraisal: this assessment identified local problems and needs, solutions and
practices (opportunities) related to production, social and communication issues
2.A local innovation and communication program: strategic guidelines were developed with relevant local
partners in response to the findings of the appraisal, with a medium-term projection (3-5 years).
3.Local innovation and communication plans (the Spanish acronym is PLICs): these plans supported the
management and implementation of priority communication activities at the field level.

The PLICs were developed within the framework of Espacios Locales de Concertación (local areas of agreement)
promoted by the INIAF as venues for dialogue and informed decision-making with the participation of farmers’
organisations, small-scale producers, local governments, NGOs and media. The PLICs are operational tools
that involve different communication resources and include participatory methodologies which support two-
way learning processes, such as Audiovisual Pedagogy or training activities aimed at developing technical and
communication capacities at the local level. A set of systematized iKnowledge and Communication Modules
including videos, printed materials and audio tracks were developed based on the principles of the Audiovisual
Pedagogy methodology:
• Recovery of farmers’ traditional knowledge and combination with scientific knowledge;
• Direct reference to the producers’ reality (using their own language);
• Practical learning designed for smallholders and rural families;
• Active participation of producers in the collective learning process;
• No interference in productive activities (trainings are carried out where producers live);
• Use of audiovisual tools to overcome literacy barriers in the transmission of knowledge; and
• Choice of technical information appropriate to the different groups.

Outcomes
At the local level, seven intensive training-of-trainers courses on the Audiovisual Pedagogy methodology and the
application of Knowledge and Communication Modules were offered to technicians, communication practitioners,
extensionists and community agents. A total of 162 people were trained as local innovation operators to act in
turn as facilitators and use the modules to train small-scale producers in their local communities. This process
involved 52 institutions in the Bolivian innovation system. At the community level, 26 training activities were
implemented using the modules. The training activities conducted by the local facilitators have reached overall
489 producers from 54 rural communities.
The full report is available at FAO and CSDI, 2010a and 2010b