--- Page 88 ---

75 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems Lessons learned and recommendations 1.Water is the linking thread which connects the tropical Andes to most watersheds in South America, not only those flowing west to the Pacific Ocean that provide water for cities, such as Lima, Quito and Guayaquil, but also east to the Atlantic Ocean, by way of the Amazon river basin and the La Plata River basin. As such, the hydrological stability of most of the continent depends on services provided by micro-ecosystems located above 4 000 metres above sea level (páramos, wetlands and glaciers). 2.A strategy for adaptation to climate change, risk management and natural resource management (in the case of South America) must be addressed with a regional approach that goes beyond national boundaries to become a strategy for natural resource management in the subcontinent of South America as a territorial unit. The territorial unity of the continent of South America is determined by hydrological dynamics which, according to the law of gravity, has its origin in the higher elevations of the Andes, downstream to the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. 3.Watershed committees allow for the governance of natural resources beyond the political boundaries that may run through the basin. However, watershed committes have sectorial limitations, as they act in matters only directly related to the basin. For that reason, it is essential that, whenever posible, watershed committees establish a close partnership with local government authorities,  including municipalities. It is also important that municipalities establish intermunicipal alliances to overcome the administrative limits imposed by political borders and allow them to cover the entire transnational watershed. 4.Supranational feedback must begin from the communities located in the Andean plateaus, since they act as true guardians of the water recharge areas that feed the subcontinent’s watersheds. 5.The focus on existing practices and local knowledge for adaptation to climate risk and conservation of agricultural biodiversity is the best guarantee for the sustainable management of Andean watersheds. Andean traditional farming practices, such as the construction of terraces, are well adapted to the conservation of soil organic content and water retention. The local knowledge of conservation practices in situ and the resilience of some crops and livestock products should be valued and included in the development of modern institutions. 6.The creation of synergies between producer organizations and local government institutions is a fundamental element because it provides the link between local governments and civil society organizations.