--- Integrated community approaches to DRR and adaptation in Papua New Guinea ---

426 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK While practices in linking CBDRM and CBA still need to be explored further, the example below of Papua New Guinea provides a practical framework that demonstrates the value of combining DRR and climate change adaptation at the community level to guide agricultural practice.

The expansion and institutionalization of CBDRM in many parts of Asia and Latin America offers a wide plat- form on which CSA can build. In some Asian countries, CBDRM has been institutionalized and mainstreamed.

Cambodia, the Philippines and Viet Nam have developed national strategic CBDRM plans for legislative and executive approval. A wide range of key stakeholders have been involved in the process to ensure support and institutionalization, including top-level government leaders, related line ministries, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), local governments, grassroots organizations, donors and other agencies (EC et al., 2008a).

In addition, in Southeast Asia, progress has been made in mainstreaming CBDRM into socio-economic devel- opment policies that build the resilience of communities, including action plans at national, subnational and local levels to support CBDRM (EC et al., 2008a). In the Philippines, CBDRM is practiced nationwide, and in Viet Nam it has evolved since the early 1990s to become an example of good practice with strong involvement and commitment from local and national governments (EC et al., 2008b). Recently, the government of Viet Nam approved a national CBDRM programme to establish CBDRM initiatives in 6 000 of the most vulnerable communes and villages in the country by 2020, a decision that will significantly up-scale CBDRM throughout Viet Nam (UNISDR, 2011b). These robust enabling environments for CBDRM can support community-based efforts in CSA.

Box 15.4 Integrated community approaches to DRR and adaptation in Papua New Guinea In Papua New Guinea the community-based framework for addressing DRR, which had been previously developed with some indigenous communities in Papua New Guinea, was used and adjusted to address climate change at the village level.

The original community-based framework for DRR used participatory techniques, such as guided discovery, mapping exercises, timelines and matrix rankings to collect information from community members on village history, hazards and event timelines, maps, and environmental and social trends. This baseline information was used to identify, in collaboration with communities, underlying vulnerability factors, both external and internal. Lastly, communities identified past and present indigenous and scientific strategies used, and prioritized possible risk and vulnerability reduction strategies. This DRR framework addressed short-term DRR needs as well as addressed floods, storms, landslides, and volcanic eruptions.

The framework was then used as a practical entry point for discussing why and how communities are also vulnerable to climate change and what measures could be taken to address these challenges. The concerns and priorities of communities identified in the original DRR framework were combined with information about how global climate change was linked to local conditions. The assessment of climate change impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation on SIDS prepared by Center for International Climate and Environmental Research – Oslo (CICERO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) was used as a baseline (CICERO and UNEP/GRID-Arendal, 2008). External scientific information on the historical and potential future consequences of climate variability and change, such as satellite observations and downscaled climate projections, were integrated for short- and long-term scenarios.

Invasive species were identified as an additional threat that could change the pest or disease profile of local agricultural systems. To identify indigenous strategies for reducing vulnerability to climate change, the focus was on determining how local communities had responded to longer-term changes in the past.

The combined community-based framework for DRR and climate change adaptation articulates local and global knowledge, linking community knowledge with external scientific information and approaches. The process resulted in a combination of short-term solutions such as appropriate cropping patterns and land use, with longer-term solutions using external knowledge such as identifying previously unknown suitable crops or crops grown locally.

Source: Kelman et al., 2009