--- Private Sector Investments ---

361 MODULE 13: Mainstreaming CSA into National Policies and Programmes may also be possible by establishing an integrated investment framework to attract national and international climate funds from different public and private sources (see also Module 14 on financing).

Where decentralized government organizations have responsibility for certain elements of strategy implemen- tation, it is important that financial flows from the central government or local revenue-raising capacity are sufficient to allow decentralized authorities to carry out their responsibilities in ways that are consistent with the law. In countries where prices are regulated, price support regimes and options for sharing public support between price support and other supporting mechanisms should be reviewed.

Land tenure regimes Secure land rights are part of the enabling environment for investments in sustainable land and water man- agement, which are crucial elements of CSA. Many CSA strategies have a strong land tenure dimension be- cause tenure security promotes and generates incentives for long-term investment. Unclear land tenure may lead to difficulties in establishing benefit distribution mechanisms for payments for ecosystem services (Run- sten and Tapio-Bistrom, 2011).

Land tenure is a complex issue. It covers a mix of rights, rules and institutions that vary from highly individu- alistic to communal systems. CSA systems need to be adapted to a country’s particular tenure systems. Those working to implement CSA need to work together with land tenure specialists to understand tenure systems and work within them. Some examples include: simple land registrations systems in Ethiopia that facilitated investment in sustainable land management; the provision of land-users rights to trees that promoted ‘re- greening’ in Niger; and the transference of long-term land use rights to users in China, which played a key role in broader watershed restoration and CSA. Since land rights are a key part of the enabling environment for investing in sustainable intensification, landscape restoration and sustainable woodland and forest manage- ment, land tenure regimes create the link between sound agricultural and forest land-use planning.

Land management regulations also play a role in CSA. For example, protecting stream beds or erosion control mechanisms can be done by requiring controlled grazing of animals. However, such measures only work where they can be implemented and enforced and where there is public acceptance of them and an understanding of why they are needed. Voluntary mechanisms and incentives are equally important.

Private Sector Investments Regulations governing private sector investment must also play a part in creating an enabling environment for CSA. By taking into account the importance of improving the overall business environment through simple, transparent regulations and tax structures, finance regulations can incorporate climate-smart requirements into lending conditions. The example of the BNDES is illustrative. Using screening guidelines to determine whether loans are consistent with the Equator Principles (a credit risk management framework for determin- ing, assessing and managing environmental and social risk in project finance transactions), the BDNES has improved its environmental and social screening process, developed specific guidelines for sustainable agri- culture, livestock and forest management, heightened the attractiveness of green lines of business, increased the focus on social inclusion and decreased its carbon footprint (see also Box 13.1). 13.2 Improve market accessibility: policy and financial instruments Market failures in rural areas often are the result of asymmetric information, high transaction costs and imper- fectly specified property rights. Addressing these constraints requires innovative institutional arrangements and partnerships that improve effective market linkages and offer more stable and better prices to producers.

Realizing the potential of CSA depends on the ability to convey market information, coordinate production and marketing, define and enforce property rights, and mobilize farmers to participate in markets and enhance the competitiveness of agro-enterprises (FAO, 2012b).