--- Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs): ---

554 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs): A set of government prioritized actions aimed at reducing or limiting greenhouse gas emissions.

National platform for disaster risk reduction: A generic term for national mechanisms for coordination and policy guidance on disaster risk reduction that are multi-sectoral and inter-disciplinary in nature, with public, private and civil society participation involving all concerned entities within a country.

Natural hazard: Natural process or phenomenon that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental damage.

Networks: Networks can be vast repositories of data and/or affiliations of expert contacts on particular issues.

Networks allow for knowledge to be shared and managed within and across institutions, thereby facilitating collaboration and research. Networks can also take up an advocacy role.

No regret options: options that are valid whether climate change will occur as expected or not. In general, they are aimed at increasing the resilience of rural population and reducing their vulnerability to water-related shocks.

Ocean acidification: Increased concentrations of CO2 in sea water causing a measurable increase in acidity (i.e. a reduction in ocean pH). This may lead to reduced calcification rates of calcifying organisms such as corals, molluscs, algae and crustaceans.

Paludiculture: The process of transforming land into a wetland such as a marsh, a swamp or a bog.

Partnership brokers: Skilled communicators who support interactive collaboration between different types of stakeholders (e.g. public-private partnerships). Partnership brokering should minimize asymmetries of power between actors, ensuring that all stakeholders are heard and their expertise shared appropriately. Depending on the local context, the capacities and legitimacy available, a brokering role can be played by local govern- ment, extension services, civil society organizations or national agricultural research systems.

Payment for Environmental services (PES): An economic instrument designed to provide positive incentives to users of agricultural land and those involved in coastal or marine management. These incentives are ex- pected to result in continued or improved provision of ecosystem services, which, in turn, will benefit society as a whole.

Peatlands: Peatlands or organic soils are soils with a substantial layer of organic matter near or at the surface.

Peri-urban agriculture: An agricultural system developed around cities to take advantage of local markets for high value crops (fruits, vegetables, dairy products, etc.).

Permaculture: Permaculture (permanent+agriculture) is the conscious design and maintenance of agricul- turally productive ecosystems which have the diversity, stability, and resilience of natural ecosystems. It is a land use and community building movement which strives for the harmonious integration of human dwellings, microclimate, annual and perennial plants, animals, soils, and water into stable, productive communities.

Private sector: The part of an economy, industry, etc., which is privately owned and free from direct state con- trol.

Public good: A good with benefits for the broader economy and society, or which generates benefits in a differ- ent location from where the activity takes place.

Public sector: The part of a country’s economy which is controlled by the state.