--- Honduras: Quesungual Slash and Mulch Agroforestry System ---

121 MODULE 4: Soils and their management for CSA Water use efficiency and irrigation As the climate changes, more attention should be placed on using water efficiently, reducing evaporation and enhancing infiltration and moisture retention in the soil profile through SOM management combined with the use of more drought-resilient species (see Module 3 on climate-smart water management).

Waterlogging from soil compaction, the over-application of irrigation water, inadequate drainage or soil pud- dling in paddy rice systems produces CH4 emissions. Avoiding these emissions is particularly important as CH4 is a much more powerful GHG than CO2. After 20 years, CH4 has a global warming potential 72 times higher than CO2.

Irrigation increases crop and grassland productivity, particularly in drylands. The decomposition of roots and unharvested above-ground plant materials increases SOC, which delivers multiple benefits. The specific context will determine the most appropriate rainfed or irrigated system, as there are trade-offs that may need to be made. For example in irrigated systems, a trade-off may need to be made between reducing fos- sil fuel use and GHG emissions by using a gravity-fed irrigation and optimizing the efficiency of water use by using sprinkler or drip irrigation that emit more GHGs because they require fossil fuels for pumping water and transport. Addressing soil and water salinity in agricultural landscapes involves reducing salinity and Box 4.3 Honduras: Quesungual Slash and Mulch Agroforestry System Slash and burn is a traditional form of agriculture practiced by small-scale farmers on around 20 percent of the tropical land area. Despite the short-term benefits obtained from its use (e.g. firewood, nutrients for crop development and reduced incidence of pests and diseases), it is recognized as an environmentally unfriendly practice that does not guarantee food security and exacerbates natural resource degradation and climate change.

In southwest Honduras, in the early 1990s, experts from FAO identified native farming practices and worked together with farmers to develop a suitable production system to replace the slash-and-burn system. The ‘Quesungual Slash and Mulch Agroforestry System’ (QSMAS) is a smallholder production system that uses a set of technologies for the sustainable management of vegetation, soil, water and nutrients in drought-prone areas of the sub-humid tropics. QSMAS can be considered a model system that applies conservation agriculture principles to achieve sustainable food security and ensure the delivery of other ecosystem services in drought- prone hillsides that must deal with the impacts of land degradation and climate change.

The basic Principles behind QSMAS success: 1 No Slash & burn Management (partial, selective and progressive slash-and-prune) of natural vegetation. 2 Permanent soil cover Continual deposition of biomass from trees, shrubs and weeds, and throgh crop residues. 3 Minimal disturbance of soil No tillage, direct seedling and reduced soil disturbance during agronomic practices. 4 Efficient use of fertilizer Appropriate application (timing, type, amount and location) of fertilizers. 1992 2006 Source: R. Vargas based on Castro et al., 2008 and 2009