--- Source: GIAHS, 2013a ---

180 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Farmers and herders interact with the ecosystems in which they live. Similarly, domesticated crops and ani- mals also interact with species in the wild. Nomadic and semi-nomadic pastoral systems foster particularly valuable interactions between domestic and wild species.

Box 6.3 Rice-fish agriculture systems in China The rice-fish cultural system is practised in a mountainous area of the southern Zhejiang province in China, in Longxian Village in Qingtian County. In this system, rice fields are irrigated using gravity-fed methods that draw water from streams. Fish swim though the streams and live in the paddies.

The system creates an ecological symbiosis. Fish provide nutrition and fertilizer to rice, regulate micro-climatic conditions and eat larvae and weeds in the flooded fields. Their presence reduces the cost of labour needed for fertilization and pest control. The extension of the shallow water surface in rice fields and the disturbances caused by the activities of the fish help maintain high levels of oxygen in the water, which is essential for fish growth.

Because little or no chemical fertilizers and pesticides are used in the paddy fields, the system also supports the conservation of agricultural biodiversity, including: traditional rice varieties; native breeds of carps (red, black, white); and other wild aquatic species, such as frogs, toads, newts, salamanders, snails, rice field eels and loaches.

By enabling communities to sustain themselves, the rice-fish agriculture systems create favourable eco- environmental conditions that help conserve other crop species cultivated in home gardens (e.g. lotus roots, beans, taro, eggplant, Chinese plums, mulberry and forest tree species of ethno-botanical and medicinal uses).

All the services provided by the rich biodiversity of the rice-fish agricultural system strengthen the resilience of the whole wetland ecosystem. The system can help farmers adapt to changing climate conditions and contribute to the development of climate-smart agriculture. The application of integrated rice-fish farming is now being validated through field activities in Mali and in Burkina Faso, where there is considerable potential for the integration of irrigation and aquaculture (reviewed in Halwart and Dam, 2006).

Source: GIAHS, 2013a Box 6.4 Sustainable practices of nomadic pastoralists In the Islamic Republic of Iran, the highly diverse vegetation of the rangelands has evolved together with the livestock and land management systems of pastoralists. Wildlife has also evolved side by side with nomadism. Nomadic pastoralists describe how throughout time livestock have grazed side by side with wild ungulates.

They speak of “the brotherhood of livestock and wildlife.” The Qashqai nomadic pastoralists have sophisticated scouting and early warning systems that enable them to predict droughts, take preventive measures and adopt coping strategies.

Over time, the Qashqai have developed irreplaceable techniques of habitat management and rangeland rehabilitation for maintaining the diversity of bio-ecological systems. Most Qashqais know the names and properties of every botanical species on the rangelands. They can provide comprehensive descriptions of their value for medicine, food, feed and manufacturing, and their place in the ecosystem.

Under the indigenous management systems of the Qashqai, the cutting of living trees, other than in extreme need and with sustainable use in mind, is prohibited and considered a sin. Sustainable use of non-timber products (e.g. gums, medicinal and veterinary plants, vegetable dyes, mushrooms and other edible herbs and fruits) are relied on for subsistence and only occasionally sold at markets.

The Qashqai’s sustainable hunting practices have preserved wildlife for centuries. Adaptive methods for capturing and storing water in drylands and maintaining springs and water holes for their livestock have also provided water for wildlife.

Source: GIAHS, 2013c