--- Sources: FAO, 2003 and 2009b ---

250 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK just livelihood. The ecosystem approach to fisheries and aquaculture (EAF/EAA)3 provides the strategies and tools for implementing the FAO Code and implies a holistic, integrated and participatory approach to managing fisheries and aquaculture systems (see Box 10.4).

As EAF/EAA calls for a broader and more holistic approach to analysis and management actions (Figures 10.2 and 10.3), the process itself can assist in monitoring climate change and its impacts.

Using EAF/EAA’s broad and integrated monitoring system would allow for the monitoring of changes in the aquatic ecosystems and their impacts pathways through the fisheries and aquaculture systems. A key step in any EAF/EAA pro- cess includes the identification of issues (and their prioritisation through a risk assessment) that need to be addressed by management, including all direct and indirect impacts of production, processing and supply chains on the broader aquatic and coastal systems. Also covered in this process is the identification of any non-sector issues (external to the management system), such as global demand, input prices, climate variability and change, that are affecting, or could affect in the future, the performance of the system and its management. 3 See FAO 2003, 2009b and 2010b.

Box 10.3 A brief overview of the ecosystem approach to fisheries and aquaculture The EAF/EAA is a holistic strategy for managing capture fisheries and aquaculture in ways that integrate ecological, socio-economic and institutional dimensions. The EAF/EAA focuses on fisheries and aquaculture management, but its perspective covers more than a narrow focus on the production and management of commercially important species. The EAF/EAA includes interactions between the core of the productive fish system and the people who depend on it, as well as the system’s other social and ecological elements. It is aligned with more general ecosystem approaches and supports the sector’s contributions to broader multi-sectoral applications.

The purpose of the EAF/EAA is to plan, develop and manage fisheries and aquaculture in a manner that addresses different societies’ multiple needs and aspirations, without jeopardizing the options for future generations to benefit from the full range of goods and services provided by aquatic ecosystems. EAF/EAA strives to balance diverse societal objectives by taking account of the knowledge and uncertainties of biotic, abiotic and human components of ecosystems and their interactions and applying an integrated management approach within ecologically meaningful boundaries.

Within the overall objectives of human and ecosystem well-being, the application of the EAF/EAA should address the following principles: • apply the precautionary approach when faced with uncertainty; • use the best available knowledge, whether scientific or traditional; • acknowledge multiple objectives and values of ecosystem services; • embrace adaptive management; • broaden stakeholder participation with due consideration to gender; • ensure equitable distribution of benefits from resource use; and • promote sectoral integration and interdisciplinarity.

Sources: FAO, 2003 and 2009b