--- Bank made by Ademola Braimoh, David Treguer and Marco Van der Linden. The module was reviewed by The ---

406 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 14.4 Preparing for the way forward in international CSA financing The current dynamics in international climate finance are in favour of CSA with significant potential for new and additional opportunities to use international financing for turning public and private agriculture invest- ments into CSA investments. Fragmentation of climate finance sources has been a particular challenge for concepts like CSA that draw their comparative advantage from the utilization of cross-cutting synergies. With the ongoing shift in focus towards integrative approaches, exploring ways to sensibly and effectively combine thematically separated channels of funding, this barrier to accessing international funding for CSA projects is gradually diminishing. This conceptual change is reinforced by an overall increasing attention on agriculture in a climate change context, representing not only the arguably most important sector for climate change ad- aptation, but at the same time one of the world’s largest sources of GHG emissions. Especially in combination with forest degradation and competing land use, agriculture is increasingly recognized as one of the crucial parts of the global climate challenge.

While underdeveloped financing channels, like private sector investments or carbon markets, are likely to provide only limited financing for specific niches (e.g. manure management or product certification) in the mid- term, bilateral as well as multilateral public financing is starting to put more explicit emphasis on CSA activi- ties. For example, the ongoing process of the GEF-6 replenishment is pointing in this direction. Perhaps most importantly in the mid-term future, the current design process of the Green Climate Fund might be influenced by this overall dynamic, which bodes well for the development of CSA financing. Assuming that the GCF will have a significant impact on the entire climate finance landscape, not only in structure but also in prioritization and principles, a clear focus on CSA embedded in the GCF design would make a difference for the way CSA approaches can be realized and scaled-up in the coming decades.

For developing countries, this implies an opportunity as much as a challenge. In order to successfully access, but more importantly to effectively use increasing volumes of international CSA financing, developing coun- tries will have to ensure that the necessary prerequisites are in place. While significant readiness activities have been ongoing in REDD+ for a long period of time, there are still more gaps to be filled in the agricultural sector to improve the basis for larger-scale CSA investments. Challenges include the usual suspects, such as the quality and quantity of available data, the effectiveness of monitoring systems to institutional and techni- cal implementation capacity as well as the suitability of policy and legal frameworks. Existing knowledge and experiences on CSA as well as the wealth of climate change needs assessments and priority setting at the national level (e.g. through NAPAs, Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions, etc.) provide a solid basis for concrete and country-specific preparatory measures. In order to get a head-start on CSA, developing coun- tries could consider putting the fundamentals in place now to be ready to use new CSA opportunities as they emerge.

Notes This module was written by Leslie Lipper (FAO) and Bjorn Conrad (FAO) with contributions from the World Bank made by Ademola Braimoh, David Treguer and Marco Van der Linden. The module was reviewed by The Global Mechanism of the UNCCD, in particular by Elisabeth Barsk-Rundquist, Camilla Nordheim-Larsen and Siv Oystese. Additional inputs were also provided by Luis Bockel (FAO), Uwe Grewer (FAO) and Savis Joze Sad- eghian (FAO).