--- Page 529 ---

516 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Milestones and targets help to identify the range of achievements expected in shorter- and longer- term scales. Project and programme baselines are then prepared to measure future changes. • Developing a results-based management: this provides a framework whereby monitoring and evalua- tion is used to drive stakeholders to focus much more on results (outputs and outcomes) rather than inputs and activities. • Carrying out appraisals: these appraisals review the whole design with regard to its risks, technical and social feasibility, robustness and efficiency and safeguards. 3.Implementation of the adaptation and mitigation actions, with the appropriate monitoring, evaluation and learning system, is the third element of the process. Initial emphasis is placed on monitoring with the continuous collection of data on specified indicators for implementation in relation to activity sched- ules, expenditure of allocated funds, and progress and achievements in relation to its objectives. Moni- toring helps to inform supervision oversight and accountability. 4.Evaluation is the periodic assessment of the design, implementation, outcomes, impact and sustain- ability of a development intervention. It includes the review of ex-ante predictions of efficiency and effectiveness. The evaluation framework is set at the beginning of the intervention, both in the design of the logical framework, but also in the design and sampling of the project and the programme’s baseline situation. It is also fundamentally inherent in the various stakeholders’ assessment of the expectations of results, both at the beginning and at the end of a project.

Monitoring and evaluation are not completely separable, but they are two distinct things. They need to be linked to understand causes and effects. Both are concerned, to different degrees, with tracking pro- gress and change. Both are concerned with ensuring upwards and downwards accountability of results to a range of stakeholders. They both require participation by stakeholders to generate, analyse and verify information.

Learning is a continuous process related to monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. The learning pro- cess is enhanced at the evaluation stage when important issues are identified and lessons are drawn to improve the way interventions are implemented. This process also offers lessons for future interventions and policies, and helps to build local capacities. With considerable uncertainties in CSA interventions, this learning process significantly helps adaptive management during implementation. Experience has shown that throughout this process it is important to apply participatory, gender-sensitive approaches and methods to increase the involvement of beneficiaries and stakeholders. This can be a prolonged pro- cess and can incur costs. However, if it is done well, the greater range of information gathered and the improved validation of the results usually will more than compensate for the extra time and expense. In addition, participatory approaches give stakeholders a greater sense of ownership of the results and can strengthen their adaptive capacity.

Figure 18.8 shows, using a results-based framework, how specific CSA practices are expected to be linked to intermediate variables (on the output and outcome level) and finally lead to improvements in terms of adapta- tion, mitigation and food security. The starting point is the implementation of specific CSA farming practices as well as CSA support activities. An evaluation has to show if and to which extent such activities translate into positive impacts in terms of climate change mitigation, adaptation and food security. Changes in biophysical, socio-economic and institutional outcomes may occur, as a result of CSA activities which in turn have been delivered by key project outputs. The outcome variables can usually be defined as changes in behaviour, agri- cultural systems and institutional capacity that translate into effective adaptation, mitigation and food security benefits at the impact level.