--- Page 312 ---

299 MODULE 11: Developing sustainable and inclusive food value chains for Climate-smart agriculture waste may occur due to poor milking techniques, illnesses, infection or diseases, which have a negative impact on milk production (FAO, 2011b; FAO, 2011d).

Good livestock production and dairy farming practices Good livestock production and dairy farming practices include proper management and housing, nutrition (ad- equate and nutritious) of feed and water, milking hygiene and animal health through vaccinations and drugs, all aimed at minimizing and avoiding food losses and waste. In particular zoonotic diseases, which are dis- eases that can be passed on from animals to humans, should be controlled in order to prevent animal, and possible human, death (FAO, 2002; FAO and IDF, 2011).

Fish commodities Fish losses may occur due to infrastructural inefficiencies, infestation or ‘bycatch’ and discards during fishing (Cheke and Ward, 1998; Kumolu-Johnson and Ndimele, 2011; see also Module 10 on fisheries and aquaculture).

According to the International Guidelines on bycatch management and reduction of discards, which were en- dorsed in February 2011 by the Committee on Fisheries, discards are defined as: “that portion of the total catch, which is thrown away or slipped. They may be comprised of single or multiple species and may be alive or dead. In the context of these guidelines, discards refer to the throwing away or slipping of dead fish and fish that may not survive after live release.” (FAO, 2011c) It is estimated that around 20 million tonnes of catch a year is discarded at sea (FAO, 2010a).

There is no standard international definition for ‘bycatch’ as the term has different meanings and regulatory interpretations in different countries. However, bycatch can be understood to mean catch that a fisher did not intend to catch, but could not avoid.

Good practices to manage and reduce bycatch and discards Bycatch can be managed and discards can be reduced through, among others: • input and control measures; • special and/or temporal measures; • design improvements and use of fishing gear and bycatch reduction devices (e.g. mesh and hook size, turtle excluder devices); • use of operational techniques that reduce bycatch (i.e. backdown manoeuvre during purse-seining); • use of techniques that increase the survival rate of the released catches; and • use of vessel and fishing gear position monitoring and habitat mapping systems (FAO, 2011c).

Post-harvest handling and food storage stage and food processing stage Vegetable commodities, livestock and dairy products and fish commodities Food losses and waste of crop, livestock and fish products at the post-harvest handling & storage stages and at the processing stage may occur due to: • spoilage, as a result of lack of or inadequate cooling facilities and lack of adequate infrastructure for transportation; • spillage, contamination, and degradation, not only as a result of poor and inadequate handling, such as during transport and storage and in the case of bovine, pork and poultry meat inadequate slaughtering, but also due to processing, such as during washing, peeling, slicing and boiling of fruits, vegetables and during canning or smoking of fish; • inadequate preservation of the products; • trimming, as a result of the selection of products with the right shape, weight, size and appearance; • packaging, as a result of damaging due to use of poor quality containers. (FAO, 1989; Parfitt et al., 2010; FAO, 2010b; FAO, 2011d)