--- Page 100 ---

87 MODULE 3: Water management Changes in the distribution of precipitation, with longer periods between rainfall events and more intense precipitation, are expected everywhere. This may lead to increased occurrence of extreme weather events, including floods and droughts. Dry spells, the short periods of rainfall deficit during the cropping season, are expected to increase in duration and frequency. This will directly affect soil moisture and the productivity of rainfed crops. Such changes will be felt mostly in areas already subject to climate variability, such as in the semi-arid and sub-humid areas of sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where, in the absence of alternative sources of water, the risk of increased frequency of crop failures is high.

Reductions of rainfall in arid and semi-arid areas will translate into a much larger reduction in river runoff (in relative terms). In Cyprus, for example, analyses have shown that a 13 percent reduction in rainfall trans- lates into a 34 percent reduction in runoff (Faurès et al., 2010). In rivers receiving their water from glacier or snow melt (about 40 percent of the world’s irrigation is supported by flows originating in the Himalayas), the timing of flows will change, with high flows occurring earlier in the year. However, the mean annual runoff may be less affected.

The impact of climate change on groundwater recharge is difficult to predict. Local recharge will depend on the characteristics of the aquifer, the recharging processes and changes in rainfall. It is likely, however, that aquifer recharge will be reduced in arid and semi-arid areas, where runoff will decline (Bates et al., 2008; Turral et al., 2011).

Finally, the expected rise in sea levels will affect agriculture in coastal areas, particularly river deltas. High- er sea levels combined with upstream changes (variations in runoff distribution, more frequent floods), will result in an increased incidence of floods and saltwater intrusion in estuaries and aquifers.

Combined effects of climate change and development As mentioned above, rapid increases in water use for agriculture and other purposes has modified the wa- ter balance in many watersheds and aquifers. The combined effects of water withdrawal and pollution are affecting ecosystems and rural populations in an increasing number of places. The extent to which climate change will affect the water cycle and agriculture needs to be considered in light of these developments.

In arid and semi-arid areas, climate change will place additional burdens on already stretched water re- sources. However, agriculture will first need to respond to the challenges posed by increasing human pres- sures on these resources. In other places, climate change will be the main driver of change and will neces- sitate specific climate change-related responses. Table 3.1 is an attempt to present the relative importance of climate change and development on water supply and demand for agriculture. The relative impacts of climate change will vary from one agricultural system to another, but it is important that adaptation strate- gies take into account the overall context in which they are to be implemented.

Of particular relevance is the time frame for climate change and its relation to the speed of change driven by development. Annual changes in runoff and recharge due to climate change are expected to occur at a slower pace than changes caused by human demands for water. However, changes in variability and extreme events associated with climate change may already be having impacts and deserve particular attention for short- to medium-term responses.