--- Under FAO’s Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems Initiative, activities were piloted in the 660 households of ---

61
MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems
altogether and the soil was left to erode. It is estimated that 20 percent of the farms in the area have been abandoned. If
this process is allowed to continue, it will have massive environmental and socio-economic implications in the landscape
around Mt. Kilimanjaro in terms of food security, carbon storage, water catchment and soil erosion.
The landscape approach
Under FAO’s Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems Initiative, activities were piloted in the 660 households of
Shimbwe Juu village to enhance farmers’ cash income while preserving the ecological and social integrity of the Kihamba
system. The project implemented an action plan, formulated together with the community, with the following key activities:
• Rethinking sources of cash income.
Most Kihamba farmers only have 2-3 acres at their disposal. High value, knowledge intensive niche crops that did not
demand much water and land were needed. Three interventions were agreed on:
-- Conversion to certified organic coffee farming. Organic coffee is not only a more stable commodity today, but organic
farming also helps farmers avoid vulnerability to fluctuating agrochemical prices. This activity includes replacement
of ageing coffee trees and establishment of coffee tree nurseries.
-- Introduction of vanilla as a high value additional cash crop since Vanilla grows as a vine, and fits well into the
Kihamba agro-forestry system.
-- Introduction of trout aquaculture along the canals of the irrigation system, which can be sold to hotels in the region.
• Rehabilitation of the irrigation system to reduce water loss and expansion of the capacity of storage ponds to cope with
longer dry seasons due to climate change.
• Training in sustainable land management.

The interventions in coffee management alone are expected to increase farm cash income by 25 percent in three years. If
the analysis of the project is correct concerning the drivers of change, the expected increase in farm income should be able
to sustain the Kihamba and its environmental services for many years to come.
Since the participation in the project was intended to be a long-term choice for the maintenance of the Kihamba, the
community needed to make an independent and informed choice to ensure its sustainability. Opting to participate meant
that the community, while expecting benefits from such a choice, had to forego other development options, such as the
conversion to less sustainable, but perhaps more immediately profitable uses. To facilitate an informed and independent
decision by the community, the project organized a Free Prior Informed Consent (FPIC) process. All project documentation
was made available to the community. Preparatory consultations were held with local government officials, traditional
elders, and women’s representatives, where the the pros and cons of different development options were discussed.
Local and traditional leaders held internal consultations, in accordance with their local customs. Following this, a day-
long assembly was organized for all community members to raise concerns and reach a decision. During the assembly,
representatives of all project partners were present to respond to queries. Finally, the participation in the project was put
to a vote to all community members. The FPIC process, though time consuming, helped all the stakeholders to align their
goals.
Lessons learned and recommendations
Raising awareness and acceptance among policy makers of the importance of the Kihamba system for the region, and
its future viability, was essential at the beginning of the project. This took nearly a year, partly due to prejudices against
‘backward’ farming practices. A crucial step to build support in the government was to engage focal points in a Project
Facilitating Committee (PFC). Four ministries (agriculture, livestock, natural resources and heritage, and environment),
the district and local authorities, NGO’s, farmer cooperatives, businesses and community leaders were involved in the
planning and execution of the project. To support the Kihamba, it was essential to work across sectors and levels, with
agents with different expertise and government mandates. Because an intervention in one part of the system is likely to
have repercussions in other parts, a sectoral view cannot encompass the full ecology and the human aspects of the farming
system. For example, the choice of coffee variety for replanting affects tree cover and microclimate, which affects other
crops. The various interventions need to be continuously harmonized. This process requires high levels of information
sharing, discussion and cooperation. Frequent joint field visits and community consultations by the PFC proved to be very
effective in creating a common understanding of the linkages in the farming system.