--- causes GHG emissions. Emissions ---

51
MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems
2.2 How can a landscape approach be implemented?
Setting the stage for a landscape approach
In the area of land use-planning and environment policy, there is widespread acceptance that integrating deci-
sions across all land-use sectors (i.e. agriculture, forestry, aquaculture and their supporting ecosystem ser-
vices) is crucial for sustainable development (Geerlinsg and Steed, 2003). This is why the landscape approach
is recommended for implementing CSA. Combining the efforts from different land-use sectors, all of which
are affected by climate change, will lead to greater progress towards reaching sustainable development goals.
This will require a shift from single-objective production systems to the management of the entire landscape to
meet CSA’s multiple objectives. An integrated approach is particularly important as resources are limited and
the demand for goods and services are high. CSA requires cross-sectoral planning and management to make
the most efficient use of valuable natural resources.
Box 2.4
Peatlands as climate change mitigation hotspots – towards wiser management
© Marcel Silvius, Wetlands International
Rising the water levels on drained peatlands by blocking ditches can be done with
low-cost techniques and local materials. Dam in a channel in Mentangai, Indonesia
Peatlands are ecosystems where
GHG emissions can often be reduced
in a cost-effective manner. Peatlands
or organic soils have a substantial
layer of organic matter near the
surface. Unlike mineral soils, most
pristine peatlands are wet during
most of the year. Peatlands, which
are found in almost every country in
the world, contain 30 percent of the
world’s soil carbon but cover only
three percent of the global land area
(Joosten, 2009; see also Victoria et
al., 2012). Draining a part of a peat
dome or excessive extraction of
irrigation water lowers the water
table in the entire peatland area and
causes GHG emissions. Emissions
from drained peatlands and fires in drained peatlands are responsible for almost one-quarter of carbon emissions
from the land-use sector (Joosten, 2009; Victoria et al., 2012). Over the last few decades, there has been a rapid growth
in emissions from peatlands as they have been drained for forestry, food crops and cash crops, such as for palm oil and
other plantations. The cultivation of peatlands has in many cases lead to their serious degradation, subsidence, and
finally abandonment (e.g. Ukraine and South-East Asia). Abandoning peatlands significantly increases the risk of fires.
To reduce GHG emissions from peatlands it is essential to determine their status: whether they are pristine, drained,
abandoned or in productive use. There are three main approaches for reducing emissions from peatlands:
• The undrained peatlands should be conserved to prevent emissions.
• The drained peatlands should be rewetted through blocking canals and grids.
• When there is pressure to drain peatlands for agriculture or forestry, the first step is to increase the productivity on
the existing farmland. Secondly the land managers should target the conversion of mineral soils to agricultural land
instead of organic soils. If the peatlands cannot be rewetted their management should be adapted to reduce emissions.

Rewetted peatlands can provide income and other benefits to people through agriculture, forestry and cultivation under
wet conditions, a practice known as paludiculture. Paludiculture can be carried out wherever there are marketable
plants and animals living in wet conditions. It can be used to produce biomass for bioenergy, feed for livestock, fibre,
building materials (e.g. for construction) and food, such as berries. In South-East Asia natural rubber is collected from
Jelutung paludicultures. Local communities are earning up to half of their income from raising fish in the blocked grids
alongside the rubber production (FAO and Wetlands International, 2012). Paludicultures represent the only sustainable
mode of agricultural production on peatlands. There are however, technical and socio-economic constraints that can
prevent drained peatlands from being rewetted. In such cases, the negative environmental and socio-economic impacts
of utilization should be restricted, for example, by choosing crops that are adapted to high soil moisture; minimizing
drainage as much as possible to reduce peat oxidation and land degradation; and limiting the use of fertilizers.