--- Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Nets Programme ---

457
MODULE 16: Making CSA work for the most vulnerable: the role of safety nets
Box 16.1
Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Nets Programme
In Ethiopia, land degradation is a major cause of the chronic food insecurity widely experienced by the country’s
largely rural population. In addition, Ethiopia is ranked the ninth most susceptible country in the world to natural
disasters and weather-related shocks, with climate change likely to exacerbate this situation (Tongul and
Hobson, 2013).
In 2005, the government of Ethiopia, with the support of WFP and other partners, introduced a new way of
supporting vulnerable and chronically food insecure households, replacing continual appeals for emergency
food aid and ad hoc responses with a more predictable safety net (Tongul and Hobson, 2013). The Productive
Safety Nets Programme (PSNP) is a social transfer programme in which beneficiaries receive both cash and food
support. The PSNP covers several thousand watersheds in 319 chronically food insecure woredas (districts) in
six regions as well as two urban administrative areas.
With an annual budget of approximately US$ 450 million, the programme targets around 7.8 million people in
a normal year (and that rose to around 11.6 million during the regional drought of 2011). It is the largest social
protection program in Sub-Saharan Africa outside of South Africa and has reached around 12 percent of the
population in Ethiopia (Cooper et al., 2012). The PSNP delivers 46 000 public works ‘projects’ every year. The
public works are aimed at restoring local environments degraded by years of overuse and poor management,
including, for example, the establishment of area enclosures, woodlots, construction of hillside terraces, shallow
wells and ponds and stream diversion for irrigation, in accordance with the Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural Development procedures on Community-Based Participatory Watershed Development (Berhane et al.,
2011), as well as building social infrastructure such as education and health facilities for the local community. In
addition, the PSNP provides the poorest and most vulnerable households, who are unable to contribute to public
works due to labour constraints, with regular, predictable support through cash transfers (Tongul and Hobson,
2013). As such, the PSNP provides a planned systematic approach in addressing chronic and seasonal hunger in
Ethiopia (Berhane et al., 2011; Sabates-Wheeler and Devereux, 2010; Cooper et al., 2012).
The PSNP is complemented by the Household Asset Building Programme (HABP), which seeks to improve
household’s income generating and asset holding abilities. While the PSNP is designed to protect existing assets
and ensure a basic level of food consumption, the HABP is designed to assist households in increasing incomes
generated from agricultural activities and to build up assets so that they will be able to ‘graduate’ off PSNP
(Berhane et al., 2011). A household has graduated from PSNP when it is deemed to have moved from being
dependent on assistance to a ‘food sufficient’ situation without the need of external support (Berhane et al.,
2011).
A recent impact assessment showed that PSNP public works:
• reduced sediment in streams by 40-53 percent in areas closed to grazing and cultivation;
• increased woody biomass and forage production three to four-fold;
• increased water availability and quality;
• increased ground water recharge and improved downstream base flow of streams;
• lessened damage from seasonal floods (by soaking up rain water in areas closed to grazing and cultivation);
• enhanced down-stream crop production through soil and water conservation interventions;
• stored carbon (estimates from just two of several thousand watersheds calculated over a million tonnes of
carbon dioxide equivalent had been sequestered);
• increased biodiversity;
• increased social cohesion by improving livelihoods; and
• improved access to social services (for example 3 900 schools and 450 health posts have been constructed
or refurbished) (Tongul and Hobson, 2013).

More specifically, Berhane et al. (2011) found that in 2010, 70 percent of PSNP households in the survey perceived
their overall economic condition as better or the same compared to the previous year, an increase from 41 percent
in 2008. The survey also found that from 2004 to 2010, the level of assets had increased and distress sales had
declined, regardless of beneficiary type. Participation in PSNP was found to raise the likelihood of using fertilizer
by 19.5 percentage points. Other studies showed that households with access to both PSNP and complementary
packages of agricultural support were more likely to borrow for productive purposes, use improved agricultural
technologies, and operate their own non-farm business activities (FAO et al., 2012).
From a CSA perspective, Cooper et al. (2012) conclude that PSNP has helped a very large number of Ethiopians
cope better with climate-induced risks, although challenges in the implementation of PSNP remain. Some of
these are addressed in the section on challenges and lessons learned.