--- Page 406 ---

393 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture practices that increase efficiency, such as drip irrigation or improved livestock feeding are another important investment category (Global Agenda of Action, 2012). Investing in efficient input supply chains that ensure the availability of inputs when they are needed in the quantities and packaging required is another important type of public sector investment needed to enhance farmers’ willingness and capacity to increase resource use efficiency. For example, timely delivery of fertilizer in small packs was found to be key in determining efficient fertilizer management on farms in Kenya (Duflo and Kramer, 2011). This all would imply much greater atten- tion to the design of input supply systems to support efficiency.

Building the evidence base to support CSA One of the most important aspects of effectively implementing CSA is the use of evidence-based information to identify best options for changes in agricultural systems and the investments at farm, local institutional and national level to support scaling up implementation. Essentially this requires the development of a set of proposed changes in agricultural systems (e.g. from national agricultural planning) and screening them for their potential adaptation and mitigation benefits as well as agricultural benefits related to food security. A second important component of the evidence base is an analysis of the barriers to adoption of the practices or changes and their implications for achieving permanent adoption of improved practices. Consideration of investments in an enabling environment that supports sustained adoption of improved practices, avoids problems of dis-adoption after short-term project interventions. As discussed in the above section, another important component of the evidence base is assessing the need for risk management policy instruments as well as the potential for coordinating and capturing synergies between them. Finally, financial and economic analysis of scaled up CSA interventions is needed.

The costs associated with building an evidence base arise from data collection and analysis. These can range from large-scale quantitative survey data collection and analysis, to participatory approaches using simple tools such as the CSA screening methodology discussed above, with very different cost implications. It is clear that participatory approaches that involve key stakeholders from farmers to policy-makers in the dis- cussion and development of the evidence base are needed to realize the effective potential of implementing CSA. In many cases data and analysis, as well as possible participatory processes already in place that CSA processes could build upon, could reduce overall costs. It also highlights the need for more simplified tools to help planners with CSA investment analysis. One recent publication (FAO, 2012d) gives good guidance on best practices that are very useful for CSA investment planning. Likewise the CSA screening methodology described above is another tool that can be used for building a very simple and low-cost evidence base. How- ever these tools need to be improved, refined and extended before they can provide the needed level of detail and accuracy that CSA investment planning at the country level requires. 14.3 Global climate finance: catalysing the transition towards CSA The reform of agricultural sectors to incorporate climate change considerations ultimately relies on the re- structuring of agricultural investments, public as well as private, at the national level. Nevertheless, inter- national financing plays a crucial role in this transition. International climate finance can act as a catalyst for the broader adoption of CSA practices by demonstrating the feasibility of CSA approaches, facilitating climate change mainstreaming into national policy and legal frameworks, and promoting the creation and transfer of skills, knowledge and technologies. If used correctly, the leverage of relatively small amounts of international climate finance can help to transform public agriculture budgets and private investments into sources of CSA financing. For many countries, learning how to access and effectively use international financing options rep- resents the first step in the long-term transition towards CSA.

The challenging landscape of international climate finance for CSA In the past, accessing international climate financing for CSA activities has been a particularly challenging endeavour for mainly three reasons: