--- Page 305 ---

292 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK In a cost-benefit analysis, costs are analysed, including investment and operating costs, but also opportunity costs, which may include the income producers forego during the transition to sustainable agricultural devel- opment practices and approaches. It can take several years until these practices become profitable again and many producers are not able to bridge the gap in the income that they lost. Moreover, transaction costs, which are the costs related to transport, communication and coordination should be taken into account as well as risk, insecure access to resources and uncertainty.

Appropriate institutions and policies can greatly reduce opportunity costs, such as social safety nets and pro- grammes to reduce risk and strengthen resilience (see also Module 16 on the role of safety nets). Institutions that promote effective collective action greatly reduce transaction costs in public investment and public-pri- vate partnerships aimed at expanding agricultural research and improving extension services, combined with capacity building which helps support smallholders adopt more sustainable production practices (see also Module 12 on institutions). The costs, as well as the distribution of the benefits, should be equally shared in order to successfully achieve the transition to sustainable agricultural consumption and production. Multi- stakeholder and multi-sectoral coordination and cooperation is therefore crucial.

Synergies The traditional view is that improving the environment often negatively affects a firm’s performance. According to Clemens (2006), research has shown that this is not the case as a positive relationship between green and financial performance was found, in particular for small firms, and those that perform better environmentally were also the most financially successful.

Moreover, improving social and environmental sustainability has increasingly become a strategic issue, be- cause it determines market access (standards compliance), competitiveness (market differentiation). Further- more, inclusiveness and greenness are also becoming sources of value creation.

However, there is still the challenge to avoid trade-offs and to capture potential synergies among the three sustainability dimensions. At times, interventions may need to be planned and implemented in a coordinated manner to counterbalance these trade-offs.

The sustainable and inclusive food value chain development and its ten basic principles As previously mentioned, the sustainable and inclusive food value chain approach and CSA are complementary, but how are we able to use this approach to contribute to CSA?

It is important to understand what value chain development is. The aim of value chain development is to achieve a positive or desirable change in a value chain. A value chain development intervention can range from improv- ing business operations at production, processing, storage level or the relationship between different actors or the access to knowledge, information and innovation (UNIDO, 2011).

This section takes an in-depth look into the sustainable and inclusive food value chain development (SIFVCD) framework and the ten basic principles that guide this approach.

The SIFVCD can be divided into three phases: 1.understanding performance 2.improving performance 3.measuring performance Within each phase different principles apply as shown in Figure 11.3 below.