--- Page 267 ---

254 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Some specific technical and management measures can be identified to improve efficiency and broaden pro- duction and supply options under changing conditions. However, the potential to apply these measures, and the context in which the relevant decisions are made, will be strongly influenced by the availability of data and information, and the means by which these data may be securely interpreted and used. In changing physico- chemical, bioecological and socioeconomic conditions, making data and information accessible to all stake- holders in a timely manner becomes a major challenge. This is especially the case in areas with fewer re- sources, where issues may be more critical and the capacity to address them is more limited. The difficulties and costs of assessing aquatic systems pose an additional burden. The development of effective adaptive man- agement strategies in data poor situations is a special challenge that must be overcome across the fisheries and aquaculture sector.

Theme 2: Reducing vulnerability and increasing resilience As with other food sectors, there are a number of aspects to vulnerability in the fisheries and aquaculture sector. These range from the specific issues related to individual households and communities to the more strategic areas dealing with sustaining industry performance and national food supply. The impacts of climate change are potentially significant and will require specific responses. These responses will have to address both the increasing risks of human, physical, social and financial losses associated with short-term events, and strategic investments and operational changes required to adjust to longer-term change. Social and eco- nomic vulnerability is already a concern in a number of communities that are dependent on fisheries and aquaculture, particularly those involved in small-scale production. Building climate-inclusive resilience is a recognised need. For the commercial sector, increased uncertainties of supply, associated with impacts on stocks and their distribution and production risks in aquaculture, add to financial vulnerability within the sup- ply and value chain. These impacts may be felt in the national food supply, food security and trade.

Specific issues for fisheries and aquaculture There are a range of generic risks for the sector that are associated with climate change. However, the inci- dence and severity of these risks are yet to be determined. As mentioned above, a range of negative outcomes are expected. These will involve direct physicochemical and bioecological impacts, as well as social, economic and political consequences. Effective and well measured protection against these outcomes will be a major challenge. There may also be positive opportunities in fisheries, as changing conditions may improve ecosys- tem functions and increase productivity. Rising sea levels could create more opportunities for aquaculture in salinised coastal margins and higher temperatures could improve conditions for cultivating local stocks.

Climate change may also put stresses on some pathogens or predators, which might also improve productiv- ity. With regards to the processing of fish and aquatic animals, changing stock or production locations in some cases might also improve rather than reduce distribution efficiency. Better or more consistent catches of key species in specific locations could improve local profitability. Consequently, the impact of climate change on markets and economies may be either negative or positive. However, in most scenarios, even if net outputs across an ecosystem or region are relatively stable, changing spatial and economic distributions of supply and demand will create an additional development burden. This burden will be particularly felt by poorer or more vulnerable groups.

Changing locations, management and data needs, social and policy responses will all require effective insti- tutional arrangements. Change will also need to be made in current systems, and new systems will need to be developed. For transboundary resources, changing species mixes and location characteristics may require new and adaptive systems of management and more effective operational procedures, and the need for effec- tive resource management in ABNJ will become increasingly important. More generally, the processes cur- rently being advocated for fisheries reform will need to be taken up to reduce excess fishing pressure, improve efficiency and returns to fishing enterprises and incorporate uncertainty into decision-making. These actions would sustain supplies and, at the same time, maintain or enhance the essential human and social capital that is created through adequate access to food and employment in small-scale fisheries.