--- Page 323 ---

310 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Public actions to support food chain interventions to reduce, reuse or recycle food stuffs Public organizations are not able to directly reduce, reuse or recycle food stuffs. The private sector, including consumers, need to change management practices, technologies and behavior in order to reduce, reuse or re- cycle food stuffs. However, the public sector needs to create an enabling environment in which companies and consumers can adopt affordable, feasible practices that allow them to produce and consume sustainably or to find ways to use waste for other uses.

Creating a policy and institutional enabling environment An important driver for improved practices along food supply chains is the enabling environment that supports and motivates the private sector to invest and make changes. Factors that are considered to be crucial for the success of food loss reduction, reuse and recycling interventions include: public infrastructure, social and cul- tural suitability, regulations and fiscal policies impacting the feasibility and profitability of required investments, and provision of long-term support by institutions. Another essential component of the enabling environment is the adoption of food laws and standards based on sound and common approaches to interpretations of standards by different actors (officials, food processors, consumers), including their implementation and enforcement. This would include addressing the issue of national requirements, official controls and industry approaches to date marking of food products.

Awareness raising and advocacy A growing majority of consumers are increasingly concerned about many issues surrounding the food they eat, in- cluding the source of their food, nutritional quality and safety as well as making the best use of the food available to them (minimizing food waste). This is a positive indication that increasing awareness among retailers and consum- ers can lead to a reduction of food waste. Therefore both the public and policy makers need to be informed about the issue, and advised on behavioral change with regard to improved food use. Public awareness can be raised through education and governmental initiatives, which are possible starting points to change people’s attitudes.

Consumers have the power to influence quality standards and thus, to a certain degree, the whole food supply chain. Therefore, consumer surveys could be used to show to what extent consumers are willing to buy produce of heterogeneous appearance as long as the taste is not affected. Evidence-based information should eventually influence policy makers and institutional strategies.

Building partnerships and alliances Alliances can be built within the food supply chains between producers, processors, distributors, retailers and consumers. This could lead, for example, to the development of markets for products that are from a traditional commercial point of view labeled as ‘sub-standard’, but are nevertheless safe and of good nutritional value. In addition, finding ways to reuse and recycle waste still has an economic value and can be used for other purposes including food processing for human or animal consumption, as natural fertilizer or to generate energy (i.e. biogas). Partnerships should also be formed between food supply chain actors and development organizations, donors, NGOs, etc. to combine forces for waste management along food value chains.

Supporting product and process innovation Product and process innovation are crucial factors in facilitating compliance with market requirements on quality and safety, supporting product diversification, and fostering development of underutilized resources or products.

A key determinant of the ability of value chain actors to undertake innovation are the policies, institutions and services put in place by the public sector to create a supportive environment.

Capacity development It is essential to develop knowledge and capacity of small- and medium-scale food chain operators (including farmers, herders and fishers) to organize themselves in associations, apply quality management systems, and im- prove business management and marketing. Public services should support agricultural and fisheries producers and small- and medium-sized enterprise to build their capacity to make business and quality management plans.