--- Page 260 ---

247 MODULE 10: Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture Rising sea levels will displace brackish and fresh waters in delta zones and wipe out a range of productive agri- cultural practices. This will also destroy wetlands and have an impact on freshwater fisheries and aquaculture.

On the other hand, higher sea levels may also create new environments and opportunities for the fisheries and aquaculture sector (e.g. for coastal aquaculture and mangrove development). Increased frequency and inten- sity of storms could directly endanger people and communities on coasts and damage housing, community facilities and infrastructure used for fisheries and aquaculture. Inland, the impacts on freshwater fisheries and aquaculture are also expected to be significant with increased variability in rainfall patterns as well as air and water temperatures affecting the productivity of rivers, lakes and floodplains. These impacts will also have a critical relationship with the use of freshwater resources for agriculture, industry, energy generation and urban water supplies (Ficke et al., 2007). For aquaculture, broader changes in hydrological conditions and seasonal changes in temperature, pH, salinity and ecosystem health are all expected to change productivity and increase risks. To address these changes, some production systems may need to be relocated. Impacts on post-harvest activities, on value addition and on the distribution of fish to local, national and global markets may also be significant, with potential changes in location and variability of supplies, and changes in access to other key inputs, such as energy and water for processing. All of these quantitative and spatial changes will occur at the same time as other global socio-economic pressures are exerted on natural resources. All of this will have wider impacts on food security, habitation and social stability.

People, communities and vulnerability According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), vulnerability to change is a function of the degree of exposure to climate change, the sensitivity of a system to such changes and the adaptive capacity of the system (IPCC, 2001; more on risks, vulnerabilities and resilience in Module 1). What vulnerability means to fisheries and aquaculture will depend on a variety of factors including: whose vulnerability is of concern; the scale at which adaptation planning is to take place; and the availability of data. Thus Allison et al., (2009) described the vulnerability of national economies through climate change potential impacts arising in their fisheries (see Box 10.3), while Bell et al., (2011) focused on the vulnerability of species, food webs and ecosys- tems, and explored the issues related to tunas, their food web, coral reefs, mangroves, freshwater habitats and fisheries activities in the tropical Pacific islands. Cinner et al. (2012) built upon the IPCC model by imbedding the vulnerability of coral reef systems to climate change into measures of coral reef-dependent fishing com- munities’ vulnerability in order to capture the links between the human and aquatic systems.

Fisheries- and aquaculture-dependent economies, as well as coastal and riparian communities, are likely to experience a range of effects of climate change. Impacts will include those that are associated with changes in the resource base, such as shifts away from traditional fishing grounds or changes in available fish species.

There will also be direct risks to fishers, farmers and coastal communities due to sea level rise, stronger sea surges and changes in the frequency, distribution or intensity of tropical storms. Surrounding the changes in the aquatic food production system will also be a range of other impacts, such as increased risks of human diseases related to increased air and water temperatures. Climate change will also have an impact on food security, social services, social cohesion, and human displacement and migration. Many fishing and coastal communities already subsist in precarious and vulnerable conditions due to poverty and rural underdevelop- ment. The well-being of these communities is often undermined by poor access to capital, limited skills, the overexploitation of fish stocks, other natural resources and degraded ecosystems. As noted above, the vulner- ability of fisheries, aquaculture and fishing communities depends not only on their exposure and sensitivity to change, but also on the uncertain ability of individuals or systems to anticipate these changes and adapt. The distribution of the bulk of the world’s aquaculture production in the tropics, where population densities are high, makes the sector especially vulnerable (De Silva and Soto, 2009).