--- Source: Adapted from ESMAP, 2011 ---

150 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK ENERGY SYSTEM TECHNOLOGICAL BEHAVIORAL “Hard” structural) “Soft (technology and design) (Re)location Anticipation Operation and maintenance DEMAND Invest in high- efficiency infrastructures and equipment Invest in decentralized power generation such as rooftop PV generators or household geothermal units Efficient use of energy through good operating practice TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION Improve robustness of pipelines and other transmission and distribution infrastructure Burying or cable re- rating of the power grid Emergency planning Regular inspection of vulnerable infrastructure such as wooden utility poles Source: Adapted from ESMAP, 2011 CSA objective: contribution to climate change mitigation Given the facts and figures above, energy-smart food systems may not appear to be very important for the third pillar of CSA which is GHG emission reduction and carbon sequestration. Primary production is responsible for most agricultural emissions, but most of the energy used in the agrifood sector is not for primary produc- tion. This is also true regarding the direct energy used in the agrifood chain. However, there are additional links that make energy-smart food systems important for CSA. Many of these links become apparent when consid- ering the mitigation potential rather than current GHG emissions and energy consumption. Reducing energy use in the food chain will reduce CO2 emissions. Figure 5.2 shows that, globally, these do not represent the major share of GHG emissions from the agrifood chain. However, there are other considerations that should be taken into account. • The situation differs between high- and low-GDP countries. In high-GDP countries, post-harvest opera- tions contribute the most GHG emissions, largely as CO2. In low-GDP countries, most GHGs, largely meth- ane and nitrous dioxide, are emitted on the farm. • There is a correlation between nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from fertilizer application and energy use (and hence CO2 emissions) in the production of fertilizer. Precision agriculture, including a more efficient use of fertilizer, will lower CO2 and N2O emissions and reduce the consumption of fossil fuels. Methane emissions can be reduced by using manure for biogas, which may also improve energy access or reduce the use of fossil fuels on farms. Growing trees on farms for energy purposes can also sequester carbon and displace fossil fuels. However, increasing energy efficiency in agricultural production may also in- crease profits, which could lead to agricultural expansion. As such, the resulting land-use change would lead to higher GHG emissions (even per unit of production). These considerations indicate that there are many links between energy-smart food systems and CSA beyond the reduction of CO2 emissions from fos- sil fuels.