--- Source: DFID, 1999 ---

522 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK In other cases, men and women take joint decisions, particularly in times of crisis. The collection of data disag- gregated by sex and beneficiary groups is crucial for measuring these changes.

Methods for project monitoring and evaluation Methods for measuring results of outcomes and impacts (mainly evaluation) and progress against expected targets (mainly monitoring) are very large topics that are best examined in relation to literature on specific indicators. Many indicators related to implementing CSA deal with well-established measures of change (e.g.

Box 18.8 Sustainable livelihood framework for assessing community resilience to climate change A community’s ‘resilience’ to climate change can be assessed using the sustainable livelihood framework. The sustainable livelihood framework shows the relationships between household assets, their vulnerability and the institutional context, which determine household livelihood strategies and their outcomes. The asset pentagon lies at the core of the sustainable livelihood framework. It visually presents information about the type and level of assets the community possesses. The pentagon consists of five different types of assets or capitals: human, social, natural, physical and financial (DFID, 1999).

Figure 18.9 The sustainable livelihoods framework Transforming structures & processes • Levels of government • Private sector • Laws • Policies • Culture • Institutions Livelihood outcomes • More income • Increased well- being • Reduced vulnerability • Improved food security • More sustainable • use of NR base Key H = Human Capital N = Natural Capital F = Financial Capital S = Social Capital P = Physical Capital Livelihood assets Livelihood strategies S H N F P Vulnerability context • Shocks • Trends • Seasonality Influence and access in order to achieve Source: DFID, 1999 In general, it can be said that households with fewer assets are more vulnerable to external shocks. However, it is not only the limited amount of assets that matter in measuring people’s coping capacity. Other factors are also important, including: the quality of the assets; whether and how people have access and rights to the resources; whether and how they can use them; and whether and how the resources are or can be shared. Moreover, the institutional context, which consists of policies, institutions and processes, can also influence people’s access to assets and the range of livelihood strategies available to them. Assessing changes in these assets can help to determine a household’s resilience to external shocks. An Assessments of Impacts and Adaptations of Climate Change project in Sudan, for example, used the sustainable livelihood framework to measure the impact of project interventions on a community’s resilience. For each type of capital, a set of criteria and indicators were developed (Elasha et al., 2005).

Assessing whether CSA activities have strengthened communities’ resilience to climate change can be undertaken using the sustainable livelihoods framework.