--- Case Study 2.2 ---

60 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Case Study 2.2 Preserving the Kihamba agro-forestry system, Mt. Kilimanjaro © FAO/David Boerma Introduction The Kihamba system covers 120  000 hectares on the southern slopes of Mt. Kilimanjaro. The 800 year-old system stands out among agroforestry systems as one of the most sustainable forms of upland farming. Without undermining sustainability, it has been able to support one of the highest rural population densities in Africa, providing livelihoods for an estimated one million people. In the world’s other upland areas expanding populations have caused serious deforestation and soil erosion. Only recently, when people started to abandon their ancestral farming systems, did this type of land degradation become a problem in this area.

The Kihamba system has a multilayered vegetation structure similar to a tropical montane forest and is composed of four main vegetation layers. The uppermost layer consists of sparsely spaced trees which provide shade, medicine, fodder, fruits, firewood and timber. These trees also fix nitrogen. Under these trees, multiple varieties of bananas are grown as a staple crop. Under the bananas there are coffee shrubs and under these, vegetable plots. This multi-layer system maximizes the use of limited land and provides a large variety of foods all year around. The Kihamba is irrigated by a traditional irrigation system complemented by water storage ponds (Nduwas) which help overcome water shortages in the dry season. The Chagga people who inhabit the Kihamba maintain a high plant biodiversity (higher than the native forest) with over 500 species, including 400 non-cultivated plants. Farm animals (cows, pigs, chicken and rabbits) provide valuable proteins and contribute to nutrient cycling. The agroforestry system also provides substantive environmental services beyond the areas where it is practiced. Because of the high quantities of biomass it produces and its capacity to recycle organic matter on farms, the agroforestry system contributes significantly to carbon storage, above and below ground. The trees and dense vegetation help considerably to ensure that Mt. Kilimanjaro can remain the ‘water tower’ for the region. Urban communities and commercial flower and seed farms in the lowlands surrounding Mt. Kilimanjaro critically depend on this service.

Coffee was incorporated at the end of the 19th century. As an ecologically compatible cash crop, it allowed the Kihamba system to adapt successfully to the emerging cash economy. However, in the 1990’s, coffee prices on the world market plummeted at the same time as pests and diseases were increasing. Additionally, many coffee shrubs had reached an age (over 50 years) when they produce less beans. These factors led to a sharp decline in productivity and profitability in the Kihamba. Although food security was still not an issue, farmers were unable to meet their cash needs, mainly for the school fees of their children. As a consequence, farmers began to cut down trees to earn money from timber. They then grew maize for a couple of cycles until the soil nutrients were depleted. Finally they stopped managing their plots