--- Safe Access to Firewood and Alternative Energy (SAFE) ---

459 MODULE 16: Making CSA work for the most vulnerable: the role of safety nets participate in a savings plan and are encouraged to start their own businesses, mainly in vegetable produc- tion or in animal rearing (WFP, 2006). In Sudan, as part of a project to promote fuel-efficient stoves (see section 16.3.2.1), over 200 000 women took part in food-for-training on making fuel-efficient stoves and bri- quettes, compost and bio pesticides using locally available resources, and setting up community nurseries and woodlots (WFP, 2013).

Mitigation co-benefits Food and nutrition security being their main objective, safety nets will never have mitigation as their primary intention. Still, those safety net programmes that entail a component of asset creation or rehabilitation can also provide significant mitigation co-benefits, as Box 16.2 about Darfur illustrates. 16.4 Challenges and lessons learned There are a number of challenges as well as important design and implementation issues that need to be considered in the development of safety nets and in using resource transfers as an incentive to encourage CSA practices.

Box 16.3 Safe Access to Firewood and Alternative Energy (SAFE) Women in North Darfur traditionally collect dead trees or branches for cooking, but with the onset of the war – and the resulting displacement and environmental degradation – the supply is limited. Women have to venture into disputed territory, risking harassment and rape, in the daily or weekly business of collecting firewood. As environmental degradation progresses, women are increasingly forced to travel longer distances to collect grass and wood while confronting greater risk of attack. At the same time, the cost of firewood has become prohibitive with the continued conflict – and households are purchasing it at the expense of other needs, including selling food rations. Interviews with women revealed that they can spend a full day’s wage on firewood alone. Often children are also required to bring firewood to school to help communities with the burden of cooking school meals. Firewood consumption has also become a major contributor to rapid deforestation. Darfur is already vulnerable to climatic changes and poor in environmental resources; stripping the land jeopardizes the resumption of agriculture and livestock practices that were common prior to the war.

WFP is using practical measures to address these problems not just for internally displaced people (IDP) living in camps, but also for the host communities who live on fragile lands that are affected by the processes of desertification. These are vital tools for conflict prevention and peace building. With the “Safe Access to Firewood and alternative Energy (SAFE)” initiative, WFP has adapted its emergency programme to respond to the evolving needs of displaced and other vulnerable people. Targeting both IDP and host communities, WFP has supported the establishment of 34 SAFE training centres in four rural communities and three major IDP camps. To implement the programme, WFP has built the capacity of 73 Women’s Interest Groups and 16 Farmers’ Interest Groups to manage training centres, monitor SAFE activities, and continue developing the community centres. As a result, close to 200 000 women were trained on adult literacy, vocational training, environmental conservation and in making fuel-efficient stoves and briquettes.

Thanks to SAFE, women have reported reducing firewood collection trips (86 percent reported less or no harassment as they replaced firewood with briquettes). They report saving time to invest in childcare and productive activities, and saving money from using briquettes instead of purchasing cooking fuel (an average of one US$ saved per day).

They are also selling fuel-efficient stoves and briquettes in the market, generating an additional income of US$ 30 per month. The mitigation benefits occur from a reduction of fuel wood, as well as from the improvement of soil properties of the marginal lands in the area through reforestation and sustainable land management. Thirty- four tree nurseries have been established with a capacity of 500 000 plantlets per annum. Newly transplanted seedlings that are maintained by the communities under community forestry have covered 678 hectares of land so far. The trees cultivated are a) income generating species like Acacia (gum Arabic) and Jatropha (bio fuel); b) forestry trees for sustainable firewood supply; and c) nutritional value and fruit trees like moringa, lemon and oranges. In addition, five Agri Business Centres have been set up where beneficiaries learn how to make compost and bio pesticides using locally available resources, and applying good agricultural practices (WFP, 2013; see more details on energy-smart food in Module 5 and climate-smart forestry in Module 9).