--- Arusha Declaration, 1967 ---

473
MODULE 17: Capacity development for climate-smart agriculture
17.1 Introduction
How will the transition towards CSA materialize? Who will own and drive this transformation at country-level?
What are the national capacities that are in need to be developed and how will countries be supported in this
process? Addressing these questions starts with the recognition that making agricultural production and man-
agement systems climate-smart is a highly knowledge-intensive process. Therefore, current gaps in knowl-
edge and capacity—particularly at country-level— need to be addressed systematically. Due to the uncertain
and dynamic nature of climate change impacts, a transition towards climate-smart agriculture requires a
comprehensive capacity development approach that stimulates socio-institutional learning processes and uti-
lizes the innovation potential of agricultural systems.
What do we mean by capacity development
and why is it so important for CSA?

“What we need to develop is people, not things,
and people can only develop themselves”
Arusha Declaration, 1967
Capacity is defined as “the ability of people, organizations and society as a whole to manage their affairs suc-
cessfully. Capacity development (CD) is defined as “the process whereby individuals, organizations and society
as a whole unleash, strengthen, create, adapt and maintain capacity...to set and achieve their own develop-
ment objectives over time” (OECD, 2006). Effective CD goes beyond training, technical assistance and policy
support but instead aims to facilitate a sustainable and endogenous development process rooted in national
empowerment that enables developing countries to be in the driving seat of their own destiny. In a capac-
ity development approach, developing countries own, lead and drive the development process with external
actors (such as FAO) facilitating this change process, thus contributing to more sustainable and impactful
results. CD encapsulates both the overall aim of development (i.e. developing comprehensive capacities to
strengthen country systems) as well as the process by which more sustainable results with higher impacts can
be achieved (i.e. the modality or the “how”). This emphasis on a more comprehensive approach to CD is in line
with the international consensus on development effectiveness stating that “without robust capacity—strong
institutions, systems and local expertise— developing countries cannot fully own and manage their develop-
ment processes” (OECD, 2008).
Figure 17.1 illustrates the three different dimensions of CD—the individual, organizational and enabling en-
vironment/policy level. The enabling environment dimension addresses the systemic impediments covering
political commitment and vision, policy, legal and economic frameworks: national public sector budget alloca-
tions and processes; governance and power structures; and incentives and social norms. The organizational
dimension includes public and private organizations, civil society and networks of organizations. It addresses
strategic management functions, structures and relationships; operational capacities, human and financial
resources; and knowledge and information resources and infrastructure. The individual dimension refers to
the skill levels and attitudes of individuals. These can be addressed through facilitation, training and compe-
tency development (see FAO, 2010a).
To achieve any systemic and more sustainable change, all three dimensions of CD need to be addressed inter-
dependently. This is particularly relevant in the context of CSA, which aims for systemic change in the way food
is sustainably produced.