--- In Grand Cess, an important fishing centre on the Western southern coast of Liberia in Grand Kru County, the proximity ---

266
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Box 10.7
Improving small-scale operators’ incomes through the introduction of fuelwood
saving fish processing technology in a FAO programme in Liberia
Baseline information has shown that post-harvest operations in small-scale fisheries in Liberia are characterized
by mishandling and poor fish processing methods. This was the case in Grand Kru and Montserrado, two fishing
centres that participated in the Food Security through the Commercialization of Agriculture(FSCA) project. The poor
quality products, especially the smoked products, are less competitive and fetch lower prices. Even when wood was
available for smoking, prices for wood had risen significantly. For those who could not afford to buy wood, it has
become necessary to walk much further to gather wood for fish-smoking operations.
In Grand Cess, an important fishing centre on the Western southern coast of Liberia in Grand Kru County, the proximity
of the lucrative border market with Cote D’Ivoire represents a business opportunity. However, the operators who
wanted to tap into this market faced significant challenges as they had to compete with better quality products from
other fishing villages.

Traditional oven uses more fire wood.
Women use their fuel-efficient oven to produce good
quality fish products

The FSCA project started its work in Grand Cess in 2009. The project developed post-harvest fish technology platforms,
constructing Chorkor fish smoking ovens and insulated containers for fresh fish storage. In total, 241 operators benefited
from the project, out of which 179 worked in Grand Kru. The Good Father Fishery Based Organization (GFFBO) was a
successful example of an organization that benefited from project support. This Fishery Based Organization (FBO) has
38 members: 11 men and 27 women. The Chorkor oven is well-known for its fuel efficiency performance, reducing by
two-thirds the ratio of wood used to fish produced compared with traditional ovens. It also produces less smoke and
produces good quality products. In Grand Kru, the Chorkor oven introduced by FSCA is now being widely used as the
best means of fish preservation. This technical intervention, combined with the development of organizational and
entrepreneurial skills, has increased the self-esteem of beneficiaries. They now feel confident in selling their goods at
cross-border markets. In 2011, a report presented at the FAO-organized expert meeting in fish technology, safety and
quality assurance, highlighted the socio-economic improvements that have been achieved through this assistance.
With improved incomes from increased sales and better management, the GFFBO initiated some initiatives to boost
self-reliance. It procured a canoe, a 25 horse power outboard engine and an assortment of fishing gear and met all
other variable costs during one operational year. This FBO then embarked on a plan to construct decent houses for
members, which is in line with their expressed objectives for improved sustainable livelihoods. With training sessions,
practical experience and the outcomes achieved during the project period, members are now waiting to open personal
accounts with local banking institutions as soon as banks are opened in Grand Kru.