--- CSA and Green Economy and Sustainable Development ---

28 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK own needs”. The report’s framing of the concept of sustainable development twinned environmental action with poverty reduction, and helped set the stage for the 1992 Earth Summit and Rio Declaration. The concept recognized the value of the environment, extended the time horizon and emphasized the role of equity. The Brundtland Commission noted that sustainable development embodies two key themes: • The idea of “needs”, in particular the essential needs of the world’s poor, to which overriding priority should be given; and • The idea of “limitations” imposed by the state of technology and social organization on the environment’s ability to meet present and future needs.

In 1992, five years after the release of the 1987 Brundtland report, the United Nations Conference on Environ- ment and Development (UNCED), also known as the “Earth Summit” was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The conference articulated the notion of sustainable development and launched milestone international agree- ments on environment, the “Rio conventions”, including the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

Twenty years after, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, known as Rio+20 or the Rio Earth Summit 2012, was also held in Rio de Janeiro. While some progress has been made towards sustainable development between 1992 and 2012, large challenges remain as the human footprint on the planet is increas- ing and some ‘planetary boundaries’ are (or are close to be) crossed. We are now at a time when it is urgent to give a new and more concrete expression to the concept of sustainable development, make it more operational, and pave ways on how to integrate its three (economic, environmental and social) dimensions. This is also why the concept of the ‘green economy’ was developed.

In its Green Economy Report, UNEP has defined the green economy as follows: “An economy that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities.” (UNEP, 2010) Practically speaking, a green economy is one whose growth in income and employment is driven by invest- ments that simultaneously: • reduce carbon emissions and pollution, • enhance energy and resource-use efficiency; and • prevent the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services.

As per the definition of the concept, green economy objectives should resonate with sustainable development agendas, highlighting a concern with human well-being and social equity – both now and for future genera- tions; as well as balancing risks and scarcities faced by peoples across the globe.

As stated in the outcome document of the Rio + 20 conference the “green economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication will enhance our ability to manage natural resources sustainably and with lower negative environmental impacts, increase resource efficiency, and reduce waste.” (United Nations, 2012).

CSA and Green Economy and Sustainable Development Agriculture, (intended in the FAO sense of ‘agriculture, forestry and fisheries’) is at the nexus of the challenges that need to be addressed to make sustainable development a reality (FAO, 2012a).

One of the first planetary boundaries, perhaps the most important one, is that the world needs to feed itself.

But today, almost one billion people are hungry. Another billion is malnourished, lacking essential micronu-