--- Meybeck and Place, 2013). ---

391 MODULE 14: Financing Climate-smart agriculture under social protection investment plans. Regardless of where they are budgeted, their potential effects on risk management and farmers’ investment behaviour are important factors to consider in designing CSA investment plans.

Diversification within and external to agricultural sources of income is widely regarded as a potential adapta- tion strategy under climate change. However, the ultimate impacts of diversification on farm level returns, food security and adaptation depend very much on the options selected for diversification. Diversifying into low-risk, but low-returning activities can lead farmers into a “poverty trap” characterized by decreasing farm incomes and increasing food insecurity (Barrett, 2007). Thus climate-smart agricultural diversification strat- egies rely on public sector investments to create options for diversification that contribute to increased farm incomes. Essentially this involves investments in developing alternative agricultural value chains and market linkages. It also involves changing public investment patterns that encourage mono-cropping, such as price supports and input subsidies for single crops.

Enhancing/restoring ecosystem services within agricultural production systems. Increasing the resilience of agricultural production systems to withstand and maintain productivity under extreme events such as drought and climate change is an important feature of CSA. To a large extent, this involves restoring and protecting ecosystem services related to soils and watersheds through the introduction of improved manage- ment systems and better management of biomass (including crop residues, perennials and trees) (FAO, 2010; Meybeck and Place, 2013).

The public sector can play a key supporting role in building resilient agricultural systems by developing fi- nancing schemes to support farmers in making investments whose returns are realized only after significant periods of time. Many sustainable land management practices require three to five years before a positive return is achieved, with even longer lags for restoration activities (McCarthy et al., 2011). The extended lag time for realizing positive returns to sustainable agriculture investments was a key point made in FAO, 2007.

Figure 14.4 illustrates the problem; sustainable agricultural investments can result in a short-term loss of income to the investors while ecosystems are being restored, and this represents an important barrier to adopting such changes.

Figure 14.4 Investment barrier to adoption Baseline net income Current net income Time Source: FAO, 2007