--- Page 94 ---

Module 3:

Water management Overview This module examines the overall development context in which water is managed in agriculture and provides an overview of the current status, trends and challenges. It also reviews the current state of knowledge of the impact of climate change on water for agriculture and the vulnerability of rural popula- tions and farming systems to climate change. This is followed by an examination of possible response options for addressing these impacts. These options can be applied at various scales, on individual farms, in larger irrigation schemes, throughout entire river basins and at the national level. The module also presents criteria for prioritizing response options, examines conditions for climate change adaptation and reviews opportunities for climate change mitigation.

Key messages • Most of the impacts of climate change on agriculture are expected to result from changes in the water cycle. Because of this, the design of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) strategies will need to be viewed though a ‘water lens’. • Climate change will affect both rainfed and irrigated agriculture through increased crop evapotran- spiration, changes in the amount of rainfall, and variations in river runoff and groundwater recharge.

The impact of climate change on water use in agriculture must be considered within a wider context in which a number of issues are taken into account including: increased water demand by all sectors; the degradation of water quality; and heightened competition for water at various levels (community, river basin and aquifer). • Climate change adaptation in water includes a range of response options related to policies, invest- ments, water management, and institutional and technical factors. These options will need to be applied at different scales: on fields and farms; in irrigation schemes; in watersheds or aquifers; in river basins and at the national level. • Climate-proofing will have to become central in the design of future investment plans in water for agriculture. It will become necessary to maintain a clear perspective on resilience when screening water development programmes. When designing development policies it will be necessary to sys- tematically consider how the policies may be affected by climate change. In many cases, the chal- lenge will be to combine more efficient use of water with increased resilience of production systems.