--- STEP 1. GENERAL OVERVIEW ---

342 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 12.4 Quick institutional context assesment Whether a new CSA initiative is being designed, or an existing project is being reviewed or expanded, the guide- lines below are intended to help establish a clearer understanding of the institutional environment in hand. A context assessment itself is already a form of capacity building (European Commission, 2005), as an overview of relevant institutional capacities is crucial in advising decision-making. ‘FAO has developed a detailed Ca- pacity Assessment to facilitate situation analysis (FAO, 2012). Many additional, formalized methodologies for carrying out institutional and capacity assessments also exist (FAO, 2012). There are many detailed, formalized methodologies for carrying out institutional and capacity assessments (see reference list and additional re- sources for examples; see also Modules 13 on policies and programs, 17 on knowledge, learning and capacity development and 18 on assessment, monitoring and evaluation). The following key steps are simple and easy to follow. By identifying possibilities for successful project progress, they will help project developers and prac- titioners build a quick but useful picture of the institutional context. Table 12.2 summarizes these key steps in a simple matrix and provides an example of what such an assessment might look like using a fictional case scenario.

STEP 1. GENERAL OVERVIEW List existing climate change plans in the project country (e.g. NAPs, NAPAs and NAMAs). Do they mention agriculture? • Have CSA projects been implemented in the country or region so far? If yes, by whom and how? If not, why not? • List all sectors the project involves and which should be involved (e.g. agriculture, forestry, fisheries). • List the relevant individual institutions involved and to be involved, as thoroughly as possible. Note whether these are finance and/or service providing institutions, stakeholder groups, value systems, etc. Refer to the distinctions provided in this chapter.

STEP 2. INSTITUTIONAL INTERESTS AND MANDATE Different kinds of institutions have different interests and functions. • Against the general competencies identified for the institutions listed in step 1, sketch their interests, underlying principles and aims. (There may be overlap with competencies.) • List how these institutions stand to benefit from the project in question.

STEP 3. INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHS Different kinds of institutions have different kinds of authority and areas of influence. Map out apparent strengths for the institutions listed in step 1. • How can these be capitalized upon in the project design?

STEP 4. INSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESSES Along with the strengths found in step 3, note down which areas the institutions require support for the project to flourish. Possible areas for attention highlighted by the World Bank Institute (2011) include: weak social and political commitment; minimal stakeholder participation in setting priorities and in transparency issues; poorly defined rights and responsibilities; complex and inflexible administrative and bureaucratic structures; corruption; and lack of means. • Factor these institutional weaknesses into the planning to ensure the project’s aims are feasible, given the institutional context. • Use this part of the assessment to determine plans for capacity development within the project.