--- The C sequestration potential of ---

134 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Conventional practices Practices to enhance Productivity and Adaptation Practices to enhance mitigation Crop specialization and annual harvesting:

Many crop production systems progressively decrease SOC as most plant growth is above ground and is removed at harvest.

In intensive systems mono-cropping of cereals use high levels of fertilizers and pesticides to replace restorative fallows and rotations with perennial leys or legumes.

Often crop residues are removed for fodder, fuel or industrial applications or are burned for pest control (e.g. cotton).

The global potential of N availability through recycling and N fixation is far greater than the current, affected by the highly energy-intensive production of synthetic N.

Organic agriculture systems do not use inorganic fertilizers or pesticides but use crop rotations and mixed farm strategies, with mulch / composts / animal manures /green manures to replenish soil C, improve nutrient cycling and use by plants and suppress weeds.

The enhanced biodiversity reduces pest outbreaks and severity of plant and animal diseases.

Increasing the use of perennial crops and maintenance of shrubs and trees in the farm landscape improves soil resilience and provides diverse products (food, fuel, fibre, timber, etc.) while supporting ecosystem services.

Agroforestry systems that integrate compatible leguminous shrubs and trees with crops restore SOM and N through the leaf litter, help fix N through symbiotic Rhizobium, they enhance diversity, build healthier soils, enhance crop and fodder production.

Some species provide fruits, timber and fuelwood or bioenergy. They can also reduce erosion and provide water quality and habitat benefits through shade and deep rooting, hence enhancing resilience to climate change.

Decisions to irrigate should factor in the consideration of the cost and GHG implications of mechanized systems.

Perennial crops and trees can sequester substantial amounts of C and can store C for longer periods than annuals in the biomass of roots as well as in stems and branches. The frequency of tillage is reduced, protecting SOC and other soil functions. Other soil management options in cropping systems include breeding deep rooted crops and managing fallow periods to increase soil C stocks.

The C sequestration potential of agroforestry varies widely, depending on the specific practice, individual site characteristics and the time frame.