--- This module was written by Marja-Liisa Tapio-Bistrom (FAO), Anne Bogdanski (FAO) and Lisen Runsten (FAO) ---

76 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Conclusions The landscape approach has an important role to play in transitioning to CSA. It is an integrated approach that aims at the sustainable management of natural and human-maintained processes in the landscape. Instead of separate and often counterproductive management of various sectors, it calls for the alignment of sectoral policies and their coordinated implementation. Adoption of participatory and people-centred approaches and management structures contributes to improving the resilisence of the agro-ecosytem and the livelihoods of the people who depend on it. Scaling up the landscape approach requires an enabling policy and market envi- ronment, adequate governance structures as well as improved knowledge management and heightened insti- tutional capacity. Different landscapes require different approaches that will depend on the state and nature of the resources, current land-use dynamics, and social and economic conditions.

Notes This module was written by Marja-Liisa Tapio-Bistrom (FAO), Anne Bogdanski (FAO) and Lisen Runsten (FAO) with contributions from Anni Arial (FAO); Nadine Azzu (FAO); Sally Bunning (FAO); Christina Seeberg-Elverfeldt (FAO); David Coates (CBD secretariat); Zhijun Chen (FAO); Cassandra De Young (FAO); Paolo Groppo (FAO); Marc Dumas Johansen (FAO); Damiano Luchetti (FAO); Sheila Mwanundu (IFAD); Matthias Reiche (FAO); Janie Rioux (FAO); Reuben Sessa (FAO); Kim-Anh Tempelman (FAO); Stephen Twomlow (IFAD); and Tiina Vahanen (FAO). Box 2.4 was written by Maria Nuutinen (FAO). Case Study 2.1 was written by Richard Hatfield (Natural Capital East Africa). Case Study 2.2 was written by David Boerma (FAO). Case study 2.3 was written by Doris Soto (FAO). Case Study 2.4 was written by Lisen Runsten (FAO) and Manuela Vollbrecht (FAO). Case Study 2.5 was written by Pieter Van Lierop (FAO) and Petteri Vuorinen (FAO). Case Study 2.6 was written by Wu Ning (ICIMOD) and Hans Joosten (University of Greifswald). Case Study 2.7 was written by Sally Bunning (FAO) and Monica Petri (FAO). Case Study 2.8 was written by Tomas LIndemann (FAO), Paola Palestini (FAO) and Daniela Morra (FAO).