--- Page 38 ---

25 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries systems. Payments for environmental services can play an important role to facilitate this transition (Lipper and Neves, 2011).

Among the needed investments are important land management schemes and infrastructure, such as local roads and irrigation systems, which are an important source of job creation in rural areas. These public works can be supported by social protection schemes in order to provide work, food and income to food-insecure people. A recent report of the HLPE (2012b) reviews some of these schemes and concludes that public works programmes have proved to be efficient in dealing with covariate shocks and, if they are well designed, can contribute to improving food security.

They also include major investments in research (HLPE 2012a, Beddington et al., 2012c). To be able to em- brace the whole range of issues to be addressed, these investments need to be coordinated at a global scale.

Increased investment in public research is particularly needed in areas where return on investment cannot immediately benefit the private sector. To address systemic issues to be adapted to local specificities and needs, research will have to be closely linked to extension services and be open to local knowledge and to the demands addressed by all stakeholders, including small-scale food producers (HLPE 2012a). The transfer of technology will also play an important role. It should include the development of the human capacity to accom- modate the technology and structured partnerships to ensure that it is adapted and established locally.

Manage risks at local, national, international levels Climate change will add more risks to production and aggravate existing risks, especially for the more vulner- able. Increased variability and uncertainty make ever more necessary the establishment of risk management strategies to address every type of risk, whether climate, animal or plant diseases or even economic. Such strategies should aim to limit losses ex ante by monitoring risks, assessing vulnerability, identifying (ex-ante) damage reduction measures and acting at the earliest stage of the event. They would include quick reparation of losses to productive assets in order to avoid long-term consequences.

In doing so, such strategies should combine specific policies targeted to address specific agents and catego- ries of risks.

Policies targeted at farmers can include measures aiming at building economic resilience at farm level either by increasing income, enabling saving, by promoting diversification (especially if the risks affecting each activ- ity are not correlated) or by insurance (in certain cases). They also include measures to reduce or eliminate specific risks, such as plant pests and animal diseases, including advanced observation networks for quick response. Other measures either prevent the loss of productive assets, such as feed banks for livestock during droughts, or enable quick recovery, such as availability of seeds.

Policies should also address risks along the food chain (including for small scale food producers), including storage, post harvest losses and food safety risks. Prevention of food safety risks or effectiveness to handle large-scale food safety emergencies will depend on the services available (inspection and analytical capacities, information sharing, health services) (see Module 11 on sustainable food value chains).

Policies targeted at consumers would use measures specifically designed to address access to food that is nutritionally adequate, safe and culturally appropriate.

The efficiency of any specific risk management policy is largely dependent on the existence of enabling poli- cies, institutions, coordination mechanisms, and basic infrastructures. For example, opening markets and adequate transport systems have an important role in diluting the impact of a shock over greater areas.