--- 2009; IFRC, 2006; USDA, 2002). ---

513 MODULE 18: Assessment, monitoring and evaluation A bottom-up approach in which the local community is fully engaged complements analytical assess- ments and is strongly encouraged. In the bottom-up approach, local men and women farmers discuss and agree on the best CSA interventions that they would be willing to adopt, given the local climatic, socio- economic and environmental conditions (community-based adaptation). This provides an opportunity to link local traditional knowledge with scientific knowledge. In addition, it gives the affected populations an opportunity to identify possible unintended consequences of CSA interventions and discusses how to resolve them. When the comparative advantage of different adaptation options is not clear, an assessment of the costs and benefits of adaptation measures can be done in an economic cost-benefit analysis or a non-economic evaluation method. In either way, some metrics of costs and benefits need to be estimated (World Bank, 2009c).

Food security CSA practices should provide an overall strategy on how to achieve sustainable increases in productivity that enhance the food security of agricultural producers and the overall population. Additional assessment criteria that address a specific food security concern may need to be added to vulnerability and adaptation assess- ments. Standard literature is available on approaches for food security assessments in agriculture (e.g. FAO, 2009; IFRC, 2006; USDA, 2002).

Mitigation An assessment of mitigation benefits simulates the dynamics of GHG emissions and carbon sequestration of CSA options, and quantifies their mitigation potentials. Assessments of mitigation potential typically assume a linear relation between the intensity of the mitigation activity and the estimated emission of a given emission and removal activity through an emission factor. The Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT) (see Box 18.5) and Marginal Abatement Cost Curves (FAO, 2012a) are some of the tools that facilitate the calculation of mitigation potentials for CSA projects. Other tools include the Agriculture and Land Use National Greenhouse Gas Inven- tory Software (Colorado State University, 2013), the Carbon Benefits Project tool (UNEP,2013) and the Cool Farm Tool (see Box 18.7). These tools are not specific to any region and can be applied in any location.

A Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) approach may be necessary to estimate the GHG emissions throughout the life cycle of a product, including production, transport of inputs (e.g. fertilizer, pesticide and feed), transport of the product, processing, packaging and distribution of the product to retailers. The LCA is widely accepted in agriculture and other industries as a method for evaluating the environmental impacts of production and iden- tifying the resource and emission-intensive processes within a product’s life cycle (see FAO, 2010a and 2012b).