--- Institutional structures supporting DRR and CCA in the Pacific region ---

436 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Figure 15.10 Institutional structures supporting DRR and CCA in the Pacific region Local Government & Community Development Commitees Nationl CC Tasks Forces Pacific CC Roundtable UNFCCC/ GEF Local Government & Community DRM Commitees Local Government & Community Development Commitees Pacific Platform for DRM Global Platform for DRR Local Government & Community Development Commitees National Adaptation Plans of Action (NAPAs) PIFACC Kyoto Protocol Local & Community Development Commitees NationalDRM Action Plans (NAPs) Madang Framework Hyogo Framework Local Government/ NGOs/CSCs Government/ Donors/ Int. & Reg. Org./ NGOs Development Partners for Climate Change International CC Community Local Government / NGOs/CSO Government/ Donors/ Int. & Reg. Org./ NGOs Pacific DRM Partnership Network ISDR System/ GFDRR The Pacific Plan for strenghtening Regional Cooperation and Integration Local National Regional Global CSA can be the conceptual framework that connects DDR and climate change adaptation, fosters consistency and coherence in the agriculture sector and provides a unifying force within agriculture line agencies. By ac- knowledging the multiple challenges and the importance of aligning approaches, CSA can help to overcome “the legacy of fragmented institutions established around single-issue ‘silos’; and move towards integrated thinking and policymaking”, a flaw that has been recognized by the High-level Panel on Global Sustainability (High-level Panel on Global Sustainability, 2012). A strategic approach for planning CSA programmes should begin by taking stock of what is already in place at the country level and identifying the key gaps that need to be addressed to better manage risks and climate change in the agriculture sector.

Examples of good practice are emerging out of national enabling environments that combine the shared concerns over disaster risk and climate change. In Nepal, the Ministry of Agriculture in collaboration with FAO and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) recently developed the Priority Framework for Action for Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management in Agriculture. The Framework promotes policy coherence by drawing on the actions previously outlined in the NAPA and National Strategy for Disaster Risk Management. Nepal’s integrated framework is a promising example of good practice. It can serve as an ideal platform for advancing CSA in the country by offering opportunities for partnerships, coordination and synergy in reaching practical technical solutions. Box 15.9 looks at the Philippines and provides a more detailed example of a country that has recently developed climate change legislation and policy that integrates DRR.