--- the Montreal Protocol. Besides CO ---

552 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK mosphere, such as the halocarbons and other chlorine and bromine-containing substances, dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Besides CO2, N2O, and CH4, the Kyoto Protocol deals with the greenhouse gases sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).

Hazard: A dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity or condition that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental damage.

High regret options: They are options valid for future climate but not necessarily for the current climate situ- ation, and would therefore represent costs and have possible negative consequences under current climate, and therefore require careful consideration in terms of risk analysis.

Hydrological cycle: The process of evaporation, transpiration, vertical and horizontal transport of vapor, con- densation, precipitation, interception, runoff, infiltration, percolation, storage, the flow of water from conti- nents to oceans, and return.

Impact assessment (of climate change): The practice of identifying and evaluating, in monetary and/or non- monetary terms, the effects of climate change on natural and human systems. Potential impacts: all impacts that may occur given a projected change in climate, without considering adaptation. Residual impacts: the impacts of climate change that would occur after adaptation.

In-situ conservation: implies the maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural surroundings and – in the case of domesticated or cultivated species on farm – in the surrounding where they have developed their distinctive properties. This method preserves both the population and the evolutionary processes that enable the population to adapt by managing organisms in their natural state or within their normal range.

In-vitro conservation (of animal genetic resources): Conservation by cryopreservation of a breed’s genetic material (usually semen, embryos or somatic cells), so that live animals can, if necessary, be regenerated in the future.

In-vivo conservation (of animal genetic resources): Conservation of a breed through maintenance of live ani- mal populations, which encompasses both in-situ conservation of animals in their typical production environ- ment and ex-situ in-vivo conservation, in non-typical surroundings, such as a research farm.

Inclusiveness: Agri-food systems and related agri-food value chains that enable ample participation by com- mercial input suppliers, farmers, traders, wholesalers, retailers and consumers as well as commonly mar- ginalized groups (the poor, disabled, youth and women) in economic activities. Its focus is on wider social participation in agri-food systems and creating positive benefits to communities; it enables and involves even the smallest of participants in the overall agri-food system and others in a community that may not be involved in commercial activities; fair returns to all participants involved in activities; and fair, equal and safe employ- ment conditions.

Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs): Technologies designed to access, process and transmit information. ICTs encompass a full range of technologies – from traditional, widely used devices such as ra- dios, telephones or TV, to more sophisticated tools like computers, mobile phones or the Internet.

Institutions: Encompasses formal organizations and contracts as well as informal social and cultural norms and conventions that operate within and between organizations and individuals.