--- Page 467 ---

454 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Safety nets Safety nets are a sub-set of social protection. They can be defined as formal or informal non-contributory resource transfers (cash, food or vouchers) provided to people vulnerable to or living in poverty, malnutrition and other forms of deprivation. They can be provided publicly and privately and require no payment from ben- eficiaries (WFP, 2012a). However, they can be conditional, i.e. recipients must commit to undertaking certain actions, such as sending their children to school or fulfilling certain work norms in public work programmes in order to receive these transfers. Unconditional transfers, in turn, provide people in need with direct support, without reciprocal activities – such as general food distribution.

Public works programmes – also referred to as “productive safety nets” or food-/ cash-for-work programmes1 – are a sub-category of conditional resource transfers. These can range from simple, labour-intensive activi- ties such as maintenance of feeder roads, to more sophisticated, higher-quality asset creation programmes, such as those linked to natural resource management (Grosh , 2008). As will be discussed further below, the latter are of particular relevance in the context of CSA.

The terms “safety nets”, “social transfers” and “social assistance” all refer to non-contributory resource trans- fers. However, there is some ambiguity and discomfort with the term “safety net.” This is because of, for ex- ample, difficulties in translating the term into national languages, or the possibly disturbing image of catching people as they fall (WFP, 2012a). Safety nets are both viewed as an instrument to protect people from becoming poor as a result of a shock, as well as a tool to reduce poverty and spur pro-poor economic growth among those who have already fallen into destitution (Devereux, 2009). In the 1990’s, a definition had been proposed that captures well the dual function of safety nets – both of which are important, as will be discussed further on: “Safety nets are programs which protect a person or household against two adverse outcomes in welfare: chronic incapacity to work and earn (chronic poverty); and a decline in this capacity from a marginal situation that provides minimal livelihood for survival with few reserves (transient poverty)” Devereux, 2009 16.3 Key functions of safety nets in relation to CSA Safety nets are likely to become increasingly important in the context of climate change (FAO, 2011). As indi- cated above, there are two main reasons for this: first, mounting climate-related risks result in greater protec- tion needs from shocks and stresses. Second, especially the poorest and most food insecure households and communities, who are unable to access food and other resources to meet basic needs, evidently face signifi- cant barriers to adopting more resilient and productive livelihood strategies that would allow them to enhance their food and nutrition security in the face of climate change in a sustainable manner (which includes reduced greenhouse gas emissions). Providing resource transfers through safety nets is increasingly recognized as a potential means to help the poor overcome these barriers (FAO , 2012).

In line with this, the key functions of safety nets in relation to CSA can be summarized as • Ensuring access to food and protecting lives, livelihoods and potential gains in development – and CSA – from climate-related and other shocks; and • Enabling poor and food insecure communities to invest in measures that build resilience, support adapta- tion, enhance productivity and ensure long-term access to food.

The subsequent sections will look more closely at the ways in which safety nets can support an inclusive transition to CSA. In this context it is important to note that usually interventions involving safety nets deliver 1 WFP has shifted away from using the term “food-for-work” towards “food-assistance-for-assets”, but for the sake of simplicity this paper will use the term food-for-work.