--- Page 341 ---

328 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Table 12.1 Examples of institutions and activities that support CSA Institutions and activities for producing and sharing knowledge, strengthening capacities and enhancing communication Institutions and activities for supporting markets, financing and insurance needs Institutions and activities for improving coordination and collective action Agricultural business hubs Weather index-based insurance (crop and/or livestock) and outgrower schemes Water user groups; forest management groups; etc.

Capacity strengthening for demand- driven and gender-sensitive agricultural advisory services (including climate services) Investments that support agricultural marketing and the food system, including roads and market infrastructure Brokering links between producer organizations, research services and higher education Use of information and communication technologies (ICTs), such as cell phones and the internet to improve agricultural information access (e.g. market prices, transportation options, weather information) Productive social safety nets (e.g. cash transfers, food distribution, seed and tool distribution, conditional cash transfers, food for work) Strengthening capacity of agricultural research systems for linking with other actors (e.g. through stakeholder platforms, alliances and consortia, technology transfer and commercialization) Investment in agricultural education and training institutions and curricula reform, including at primary and secondary levels Payments for environmental services, smallholder agricultural carbon projects Community-based actions to restore degraded lands, improve management of water, communal lands Innovative governance arrangements and new regulations regarding quality and safety of food, intellectual property and biosafety Investments in market value chains (e.g. carbon labels on food from smallholders) Local seed and genetic diversity fairs, farmer-based labelling schemes Strengthening of informal agricultural markets (e.g. certification and training of traders) Strengthening capacity of farmers’ organizations to collaborate 12.2 Key institutions for CSA initiatives Studies show that agricultural research is more likely to bring about changes in agricultural practices, technol- ogies or policies when dialogue and cooperation is fostered among all the stakeholders who possess, produce, or use different kinds of knowledge. The most effective initiatives allow researchers, community members, private sector actors and policy-makers to jointly define the problems they aim to solve (Kristjanson et al., 2009).

Services As climate changes so does the role of agricultural advisory and extension services. Demand for new climate services is increasing. Farmers need wide-ranging advice on how to adapt their farming practices and their en- tire livelihoods, to take advantage of viable, profitable options with manageable levels of risk. Two types of advice are needed: firstly, information about available options (e.g. technology and market) to help adapt farming and livelihood systems; and secondly, information about the climate itself, in the form of weather forecasts, seasonal forecasts and longer-term climate trends (see Box 12.4).

Different players in the agricultural sector need completely different types of climate advice. Improved exten- sion services should not provide ‘one-size-fits-all’ solutions or static advice (e.g. generic seed and fertilizer pack- ages). They should mediate between different possibilities and market actors. Preference should be given to early warning and early action initiatives that distribute appropriate seeds based on seasonal predictions instead of to initiatives that try to control the damage caused by droughts or flooding. Institutions providing extension services should also consider building their own knowledge of weather index-based crop and livestock insurance schemes.