--- countries. Spending on climate change by the French Development Agency, the German Development Bank ---

400 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK (ca. US$ 23 billion) is in fact higher than the amount channelled through multilateral instruments (ca. US$ 17 billion). This gap becomes even wider when looking at climate change adaptation activities separately with bilateral sources amounting to US $3.6 billion and multilateral channels disbursing less than US $0.5 billion.

Bilateral Financial Institutions play a central role as intermediaries disbursing climate funding to developing countries. Spending on climate change by the French Development Agency, the German Development Bank and the Japan International Cooperation Agency amounted to US$ 11.4 billion in 2009, including both official development assistance and non- official development assistance finance (UNEP, 2010). In addition, levels of South-South bilateral climate finance are increasing. The Brazilian Development Bank, China Development Bank, the Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation have provided approximately US$ 4 billion of climate finance in 2010 (Buchner, 2011). As with other funding channels, most of the bilateral climate financing is concentrated in the industrial and energy sectors and therefore not available for CSA activities.

The member states of the European Union have traditionally been the main source of climate change financ- ing assisting developing countries, both through national level initiatives as well as climate finance activities coordinated at the European Union level. Recently, the Global Financial Crisis and the European Debt Crisis have had devastating effects on the European Union’s funding levels for climate change. The official develop- ment assistance numbers released by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) show that European Union contributions for climate change adaptation in developing countries has dropped by 55 percent from € 1.4 billion in 2010 to € 619 million in 201110. Nevertheless, the European Union continues to finance a number of major initiatives providing international climate finance. One important programme from a CSA perspective is the Global Climate Change Alliance (GCCA), launched in 2007 as a European Union initiative coordinated by the European Commission (EC). GCCA has already disbursed € 243 million from 2008- 2012 with € 47 million pledged for 2013.11 The GCCA currently supports 30 country level initiatives and 8 re- gional programmes in the priority areas of mainstreaming climate change into poverty reduction, adaptation, REDD, participation in carbon markets, and disaster risk reduction. Most GCCA priorities link directly to the agricultural sector and indeed a large share of GCCA funding has targeted agricultural activities, making it a promising CSA financing option. Another major programme funded by the European Union with potential links to CSA activities include the ACP-EC Energy Facility promoting access to sustainable energy services for poor rural populations in sub-Sahara Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific. In addition to these umbrella initiatives, the European Union, through the EC budget, provides support for a large number of individual climate change projects including agricultural activities. One recent example is a joint EC-FAO project that will provide € 5.3 million for assisting Malawi, Vietnam and Zambia transition towards a CSA approach.

Most of the individual European Union member states also have national level programmes, partially linked with the bilateral finance institutions listed above, providing climate financing to developing countries. Exam- ples for important initiatives in the CSA context are Germany’s International Climate Initiative which receives funding of € 120 million per year for the promotion of climate-friendly economic development, measures for climate change adaptation and for the preservation or sustainable use of carbon reservoirs (REDD+), as well as the United Kingdom’s International Climate Fund, which handles the United Kingdom’s contributions to many of the multilateral funds described above, but also provides direct climate financing for initiatives in developing countries on adaptation to climate change, low-carbon growth and REDD+. Total International Climate Fund pledges amount to £ 2.9 billion of climate finance from within existing aid commitments from 2011 to 2015.

Outside the European Union, significant national sources of climate finance include the USAID Development Grants Program, which includes a priority area on climate change adaptation, as well as Japan’s Hatoyama Initiative12, which pledged US$ 15 billion in public and private climate financing covering all areas of mitigation and adaptation. Among national initiatives, Australia’s International Forest Carbon Initiative stands out due to 10 Global climate change adaptation funding fell from US$ 3.1 billion to US$ 1.8 billion during the same period (OECD, 2013). 11 GCCA resources come from the EC budget, the 10th European Development Fund, and contributions from individual European Union member states. GCCA funding includes parts of the fast start finance pledged at the UNFCCC COP 15 in Copenhagen in 2009. 12 Often referred to as the Japan Fast-Start Financing