--- Page 473 ---

460 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Towards integrated approaches focused prevention and resilience Safety nets are emerging as a platform for breaking the cycle of recurrent emergencies, which are increasing in view of climate change. This is based on evidence that large shares of vulnerable and food insecure popula- tions would need long-term assistance, not only in response to shocks and disaster events. Their needs are therefore largely ‘predictable’, and a corresponding predictable level of support is required to address their food and nutrition needs with meaningful investments at the household and community levels before disasters occur, rather than with ex-post emergency assistance.

Important support that well designed safety nets can provide in this regard is through the enhancement of pro- ductive capacities, and the creation and rehabilitation of household and community assets. Often it is less the severity of shocks that determine the long-term outcome of crisis, than the ability of households to avoid fall- ing beneath critical asset-holding levels (Prowse and Scott, 2008). In this respect, resource transfers provided through safety nets can be used as effective “enablers” for communities to build or enhance livelihood assets and capacities in a forward-looking manner, thus avoiding poor farmers falling into situations of increasing impoverishment and deprivation after recurring shocks, as well as avoiding the adoption of negative risk man- agement, coping and adaptation strategies (Prowse and Scott, 2008).

There has been an increasing focus on pursuing a systems-based approach, as opposed to the ad hoc, project- based, short-term approach that dominated in the past. This is based on an understanding that more sys- tematic and predictable risk-management tools with a focus on enhancing long-term resilience are likely to contribute to a sustainable graduation out of poverty. The systems approach is relevant not only in development contexts but also in emergency and early recovery contexts where shocks can be recurrent (e.g. Ethiopia, the Sahel, Yemen) or one-off. It is a way to move beyond a purely relief-focused approach towards multi-year safety net programmes such as the PSNP in Ethiopia whereby chronically food-insecure households receive support for up to five years, and the Hunger Safety Net Programme in Kenya (FAO et al., 2012).

Matching predictability with flexibility To be effective enablers of poor farmers’ risk management strategies and capacities, safety nets must be both predictable and flexible enough to be scaled-up rapidly in times of a crisis, or reduced once a crisis is over. This is particularly relevant as climate-related shocks become more frequent and difficult to predict.

There are a number of efforts under way to make safety nets more responsive to climate-related shocks and hence more effective in preventing negative coping strategies, and more sustainable by ensuring flexibility. For example, the PSNP offers a vehicle for delivering timely livelihood protection to the chronically food insecure.

However, the programme had difficulties in responding flexibly to weather related shocks, and emergency re- sponses were often too slow to prevent the affected people from having to sell crucial assets such as livestock and equipment; many poor households that can sustain a livelihood during normal times are then at risk of slipping into chronic food insecurity. Resulting household asset depletion as well as increased levels of desti- tution in this segment of the population threaten the sustainability of PSNP.

In response to the above, in a second phase of PSNP, starting in 2008, the Government of Ethiopia, in collabora- tion with WFP and the World Bank, developed a risk management framework for PSNP. The Livelihoods, Early Assessment and Protection (LEAP) project aimed to facilitate predictable disbursement of resources for less predictable problems, in effect allowing the immediate scale-up of PSNP activities in response to localized, intermediate or severe extreme weather events. The concept is to coordinate a pool of contingent resources that can be readily and appropriately allocated through the PSNP in the event many more households become food insecure or existing beneficiaries require additional months of assistance following weather shocks. In case of a severe drought or flood, an early warning system based on a weather index can trigger additional financial resources for the PSNP from a contingency fund in the initial stages of the drought or flood – up to four months sooner than traditional crisis aid (see Balzer and Hess, 2010; see also Modules 13 on policies and 15 on disaster risk reduction).