--- in Estero Real, Nicaragua ---

62
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Case Study 2.3
Implementation of the ecosystem approach to fisheries and aquaculture
in Estero Real, Nicaragua
©Doris Soto

Introduction
The EAFA contains holistic strategies for managing capture fisheries and aquaculture that includes ecological, socio-
economic and governance dimensions. The approach facilitates the sustainable use of natural resources and integrates
fisheries and aquaculture with other uses of coastal ecosystems (see also Module 10 on climate-smart fisheries and
aquaculture). These strategies build on three core principles: fisheries and aquaculture should be developed in the
context of ecosystem functions and services with no degradation of these beyond their resilience capacity; fisheries and
aquaculture should improve human well-being and equity for all relevant stakeholders; and fisheries and aquaculture
should be developed in the context of (and integrated with) other relevant sectors, policies and goals. Other important
principles guiding the EAFA are the participation of stakeholders all along the development and implementation of the
management plans and the use of the best available information. The EAFA is considered a relevant strategy to enhance
adoption and implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.
The tropical mangrove estuary Estero Real is located along the north Pacific coast of Nicaragua and forms the southernmost
part of the Gulf of Fonseca. Despite the fact that the estuary was declared a protected site in 1983 and recognized by
the Ramsar Convention in 2003 as area of international interest, it is at high risk of degradation partly due to shrimp
fisheries and aquaculture. The Estero Real is also home to some of the country’s poorest communities who depend on local
natural resources for survival and livelihoods. Local communities rely on fishery resources, mangrove products such as
lumber, mangrove clearance for small-scale agriculture and aquaculture activities. Shrimp farming, which has increased
significantly in the area, generates livelihood opportunities but also creates social conflicts and raises environmental
concerns. Large-scale shrimp farming coexists with small-scale farmers organized in cooperatives and small-scale
fishers, some of whom use unsustainable fishing practices, such as the use of fishing bags in the mangrove area. These
bags collect not only small shrimp but also many kinds of fish larvae, which are mostly discarded. The estuary is also coping
with other significant environmental impacts, mainly as a result of agricultural practices, urban waste and deforestation in
the higher parts of the basin. Climate variability and climate change are putting additional pressures on the estuary. Heavy
sedimentation from poor watershed management, the increased use of pesticides and the loss of mangrove forests are
also threatening coastal aquaculture, fisheries and biodiversity in the mangrove ecosystem.