--- Page 306 ---

293 MODULE 11: Developing sustainable and inclusive food value chains for Climate-smart agriculture Figure 11.3 The ten principles of SIFVCD Understanding Performance 1. Dynamic system-based 2. Governance-centred 3. End-market driven Improving Performance 4. Targeted 5. Upgrading focused 6. Scalable 7. Multilateral Measuring Performance 8. Economically sustainable (profitable) 9. Socially sustainable (inclusive) 10.Environmentally sustainable (green) Source: FAO, 2013 Everything in a value chain is directly or indirectly linked. Because of this interdependence between every activity and actor, the value chain should be understood in a holistic way. Not only is everything linked within the value chain system, it is also connected to other systems, like market, farming, financial, global trade and infrastructural systems as well as the natural environment and the political, social, legal and regulatory sys- tems. As a result, the value chain system may also be influenced by these systems.

Understand performance: 1.Dynamic systems based This principle refers to the fact that the value chain is a dynamic system as it evolves over time due to certain factors, which can result in desirable or undesirable directions. The main factors that can push the system in certain directions can include changes in profitability, market demand, technology, barriers to entry, risk and policies. 2.Governance-centered Chain actors are linked to each other via various governance mechanisms, which include contracts, agree- ments and partnerships. These government mechanisms are linked to the firms’ degree of market power and collective action of chain actors, the type of service providers and the broader enabling environment (e.g. laws and regulations, policies and public infrastructure). Trust, in both the actors and enabling environ- ment, can have a positive or negative impact on the performance of the entire value chain. 3.End-market driven This principle refers to the fact that value addition is eventually determined in the end-market. It is based on the consumer’s decision to buy the product. This decision could be based on the price of the product, intrinsic qualities like physical appearance, nutritional value, attributes of the brand or how the product was produced taking in considerations such as carbon footprint.