--- Page 136 ---

123 MODULE 4: Soils and their management for CSA Restoring degraded soils for climate change resilience The world’s soils are estimated to have a high potential for carbon sequestration because SOC content can be effectively conserved and also readily restored or increased through appropriate land uses and agricul- tural management practices which can potentially be applied at landscape level (Corsi et al., 2012). The widespread restoration of degraded soils is vital for carbon sequestration and can be achieved by increas- ing SOM content in the soil and reducing erosion and polluting factors. The highest potential for carbon sequestration is in degraded soils. However, initiating the process is slower on these soils because the soil microbial population that drives the SOC and nutrient cycles requires specific nutrient ratios that take time to achieve (Stevenson, 1986). Soil erosion by water (rainfall and runoff) or wind can be reduced by a range of soil and water conservation measures, including: maximizing vegetative cover, enhancing soil surface rugosity (clods, tied ridges); contour farming (bunds; diversion ditches); and reducing the degree and length of slopes (progressive and bench terracing). Tree planting can have win-win-win benefits in most systems (apart from light-sensitive crops). Planting trees introduces organic matter at a greater depth in the soil and can reduce wind erosion (see also Module 8 on forests). Soil carbon can be enriched by minimizing till- age, using cover crops or mulch, growing and incorporating green manures or applying biochar (see Box 4.5 below).

Green manures boost SOM and labile carbon, but they also disturb soil structure and do not maintain a pro- tective litter, residue or plant cover.

More research is needed on the potential effects of biochar for reducing soil fertility in the longer term, binding and reducing the efficacy of some agricultural chemicals, and inhibiting microbial processes due to production of ethylene. In many contexts, because of the prohibitive cost of biochar, it is not an economically viable option.

Adaptive management capacity Climate change impacts are complex and will affect natural resources and ecosystems in different ways in different places. It is important that communities understand the implications of these potential impacts in their own areas and are able to adapt. There is a need to build on farmers’ knowledge and innovations and develop local capacity of land users to manage their soil systems so that they can build resilience and con- tinue to innovate and adapt to a warming climate and changes in production systems. This requires building on practical farming skills, observation, personal experience, knowledge sharing and developing local capac- ity for adapting complex agro-ecosystems to change. Examples include breeding locally adapted seeds and livestock, producing organic fertilizers on farms (compost, manure, green manure), managing soil moisture and rainwater harvesting.

Box 4.5 Biochar Biochar is a stable, carbon-rich form of charcoal that can be applied to agricultural land as an element of agronomic or environmental management. It can be produced by pyrolysis, where biomass is heated with little or no oxygen (Sparkes and Stoutjesdijk, 2011). Possible biomass sources for biochar include: milling residues (e.g. rice husks, sugar cane bagasse); crop and logging residues; biofuel crops; municipal wastes; and animal manure. The suitability of the biomass for biochar production depends on its lignin content (Eagle et al., 2012).

Biochar, because of its porous nature, high surface area and its ability to absorb soluble organic matter and inorganic nutrients is thought to have benefits for sustainable agricultural productivity. It increases biological activity and improves nutrient use efficiency, hence reducing NO2 emissions and carbon sequestration. The use of biochar is new and more research is needed on the potential benefits and risks of its use in agricultural soils. There is a high variability in properties and its cost effectiveness depends on the biomass source and distance to the pyrolysis plant.

Also, not all soils or crops show the same improvements when biochar is applied, and there may be risks associated with increased alkalinity.