--- for Climate-smart Agriculture ---

Module 4:

Soils and their management for Climate-smart Agriculture Overview This module looks at soil management in the context of climate change. It begins with an overview of some of the principles of soil health and the way soils interact with the atmosphere and with terres- trial and freshwater ecosystems. Sustainable soil management options are presented as “win-win-win” strategies that sequester carbon in the soil, reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and help intensify production, all while enhancing the natural resource base. The module also describes practices that con- tribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation, and build the resilience of agricultural ecosystems.

Key messages • Knowing the status and condition of soils and their properties is fundamental for making decisions about sustainable soil management practices that contribute to climate-smart land use. • Soils that have been degraded are at much greater risk from the damaging impacts of climate change. Degraded soils are vulnerable due to serious losses of soil organic matter (SOM) and soil biodiversity, greater soil compaction and increased rates of soil erosion and landslides. In addition, land degradation is itself a major cause of climate change. • Management practices that increase soil organic carbon (SOC) content through organic matter management rather than depleting it will bring win-win-win benefits. These practices will maintain productive soils that are rich in carbon, require fewer chemical inputs and sustain vital ecosystem functions, such as the hydrological and nutrient cycles. • The sound management of the interrelations among soils, crops and water can increase SOM, im- prove the soil’s capacity to retain nutrients and water, and enhance soil biodiversity. Integrated man- agement practices can create optimal physical and biological conditions for sustainable agricultural production (including food, fibre, fodder, bioenergy and tree crops, and livestock).