--- Page 468 ---

455 MODULE 16: Making CSA work for the most vulnerable: the role of safety nets multiple benefits for the communities involved. Hence the outcomes listed below should not be understood as mutually exclusive, but in fact closely linked to and often enforcing each other.

Protecting lives, livelihoods and potential gains in CSA Vulnerability to climate change and other risks can increase over time, and potential gains on the path towards more resilient, productive and sustainable livelihoods can be at risk if households face repeated shocks that steadily erode their assets and with that their resilience to future shocks. Resource transfers can play a role in preventing this from happening by providing cash, vouchers, food or other resources during periods of cri- sis and during the cyclical ‘hungry season’ (WFP, 2011a). Resource transfers, conditional and unconditional, have in fact been an important and well-performing part of the response to major natural disasters in the past (Heltberg et al., 2010).

For example, in Kenya, more than 450 000 people received cash or vouchers for participating in the World Food Programme (WFP)-supported food-assistance-for-assets (FFA) programmes in response to drought in 2012. As a result, nearly 10 000 hectares of land were cultivated with both physical soil and water conserva- tion measures and biological stabilization or agro-forestry techniques (WFP, 2012b). During the period from 2006 to 2010, these FFA programmes had contributed to conserve nearly 38 500 hectares of land, restore 343 irrigation systems, repair 194 kilometres of feeder roads and produce 170 000 tree seedlings (WFP, 2011b).

Government, non-governmental organization (NGO) partners and communities were trained on effective rain- water harvesting, such as soil and water conservation techniques, through a special arrangement with the World Agroforestry Centre. The resource transfers provided participation by the communities to the FFA pro- grammes, preventing a further erosion of livelihood assets during the crisis, while the assets created with the support of resource transfers were an investment in future resilience (WFP, 2012b).

In Pakistan, where many households lost both productive and non-productive assets as well as their income in the floods of 2010, FAO’s emergency and rehabilitation response programme included a large cash-for-work component. The cash-for-work intervention was undertaken in three provinces where the floods had ruined thousands of irrigation channels filling them with debris and silt. The intervention sought to repair and de-silt on-farm irrigation channels and restore and improve water availability for crop production. In total, the cash- for-work component of the response programme directly benefited 69 931 households who repaired 1 065 ir- rigation channels, recovering 114 655 hectares of irrigated land (FAO, 2012). The provision of cash to affected communities was found to be very relevant to their needs at a time when other sources of income had been lost and households needed cash to procure food and livelihood assets. Furthermore, in many cases, the cash provided through the intervention has been invested in livelihood assets (physical and human) that will provide continuing benefits. In addition, the long-term effect of the water channel repairs is the impact on future crop yields (FAO, 2012).

As these examples illustrate, resource transfers can prevent seasonal malnutrition among vulnerable popula- tions, reduce debt and increase savings and productive investment, even in areas that are subject to recurrent crises (FAO, 2012). They provide poor households with an alternative from having to revert to so-called “nega- tive coping strategies” that leave them more vulnerable. These include selling their productive assets—such as farm tools or livestock— to buy food, taking children out of school (which has irreversible impairments to their long-term socio-economic potential and resilience) or over-exploiting lands and forests (WFP, 2011a).2 In other words, safety nets play a critical role in protecting human, social, physical, financial and natural capi- tal, which are the foundations of resilient and productive livelihoods (HLPE, 2012b; PHI et al., 2011; Davis, 2011; WFP, 2011a; see also Module 15 on disaster risk reduction). This is both relevant for protecting the poorest and the most food insecure people and communities from falling into destitution, and for protecting those who are better off and already moving towards more resilience, productivity and sustainability from falling (back) into poverty. In this regard, safety nets could also protect potential gains and achievements in CSA. 2 This points to the potential mitigation co-benefits that safety nets can generate, which will be addressed further on.