--- Page 286 ---

273 MODULE 10: Climate-smart fisheries and aquaculture on the dike or in adjacent fields (Prein, 2002). In stagnant systems, such as ponds that are extensively fed or aerated, drainage is irregular and limited at maximum to a few days per year. This makes the use of drainage water from such systems impractical for crop production, unless the drainage water can be stored in a deep reservoir for later use (Mires, 2000). Nevertheless, small-scale farmers often consider their pond primarily as a reservoir, from which daily water is drawn for crop or animal production and household use (Luu, 1999). By integrating water storage and aquaculture, the water needs for aquaculture is shared with other on-farm activities, which greatly reduces water use directly related to aquaculture.

The resilience of this sector has been tested mostly by market forces. As mentioned above, the sector has also faced criticism about its purported negative environmental impact. This criticism, which has been widely disseminated though the internet, has so far been shown to have no scientific basis. Nevertheless, the sector continues to thrive. It provides a classic example of the effective recycling of waste and has a relatively low carbon emission scenario compared to most primary production sectors.

The Mekong River has the eighth highest discharge of all major rivers in the world. Catfish farming is done in the lower reaches of the delta, which has plentiful water resources. This enables the sector to operate effectively and reap high yields. However, further expansion of the farming area and greater intensification of production may not be possible. A further reduction of the discharge levels to the Mekong River will be the key to the sector’s sustainability.

Is catfish farming in Viet Nam well adapted to climate change?

This very productive aquaculture system may not be well prepared to face climate change. Rising sea levels are a real threat in the lower Mekong. The catfish farms may be exposed to increased salinity in the mid and long term. In the short term, catfish farming may be sensitive to some climate change variability and trends. For example, increasing temperatures and changes in the hydrological patterns may trigger disease outbreaks. A tight biosecurity framework is currently not in place, and given the high density of farms and very high density of fish production, a disease outbreak could devastate the sector.

Catfish farming can become more climate-smart through better planning of farm locations, improved water and nutrient management, and enhanced integration with other farming systems. However, a more urgent measure is a tighter biosecurity framework. Catfish farming can also become more climate-smart by implementing an EAA that would ensure the participation of all stakeholders and improve their understanding of climate change-related risks and prevention measures. For example, increasing salinity could be addressed by moving farms upstream, although this is an unlikely scenario. A more long-term approach to adaptation would to develop catfish varieties that are more resistant to salinity.