--- Page 375 ---

362 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Role of prices and subsidies Most governments intervene actively in the operation of their agricultural markets. Governments intervene to support farm prices because these prices are often volatile. Climatic conditions, over which farmers have no control, determine to a large degree how much a farmer produces in a given year. The most common ap- proach to supporting the price of an exportable agricultural product is to create a government agency to buy a quantity of a product offered by the country’s farmers at the guaranteed ‘support price’. Price support certainly has a role to play in countries affected by climate change. However, often there are other forms of support (e.g. regulations, incentives, investments in technology, infrastructure, connectivity or the broader enabling environment, social marketing and use of social capital) that are more effective in addressing market failures.

Price support is most often channelled through subsidies for inputs (e.g. fertilizer, energy, water, and seeds).3 With the exception of countries where input use is currently low, price support and energy subsidies should be redirected towards policies that recognize and reward CSA practices, and provide an enabling environment for value addition, commercialisation and trade. For example, input subsidy programmes designed to support a more efficient and timely use of fertilizers, rather than simply to increase their use, are important policy measures for implementing CSA (FAO, 2012b).

In countries with low-input and low-output systems, a fertilizer subsidy may initially be justified to increase yields and enhance plant growth and soil carbon. Analysis suggests that the fertilizer subsidy (up to 50 kilo- grams per hectare) adopted in the United Republic of Tanzania as part of its agricultural productivity project is climate-smart in that it has increased productivity and helped increase biomass. This has enhanced resilience and carbon sequestration. However, to ensure correct and timely fertilizer application, the price support needs to be accompanied by advice delivered through extension services and improved access to reasonable informa- tion on rainfall.

In countries where fertilizer use is already high, price support may not be climate-smart. In land-scarce, intensely farmed agricultural systems with high levels of inputs, the subsidization of inorganic fertilizer en- courages overuse, which limits long-term productivity and harms the environment. In densely populated, land-scarce countries with high rates of intensification, different policies may be needed, such as the above- mentioned policies promoting more precise and timely use of inputs. For example Viet Nam has adopted the “five reductions, one must” policy. Farmers are encouraged to use rice varieties with clear origin, pure breed and guaranteed quality (“one must”). The “five reductions” are the reduction of the number of seeds planted, the reduction of the amount of water used (at certain times), the reduction of amount of the amount of fertilizer applied, the reduction of the amount of pesticides applied, and the reduction of post-harvest losses. Under this policy, the amount of rice seeds planted has declined by nearly 50 percent and the use of chemical fertilizers, pesticides and water declined by 20 to 30 percent from earlier levels, while productivity has increased from 15 to 20 percent.

Subsidizing energy may lead to unsustainable practices. For example, energy subsidies have contributed to aquifer depletion in water-scarce countries, such as Yemen. Inadequate water regulation and pricing regimes, which leads to a lack of incentive to conserve water, have contributed to widespread drainage and salinity prob- lems in a number of irrigation-dependent economies (e.g. India, Pakistan and Uzbekistan). Addressing these problems demands a range of both price and non-price interventions to ensure reliable water delivery that farmers will be willing to pay for, as well as proper drainage.

With the demand for energy growing, oil prices increasing and the urgency to reduce GHG emissions becoming more acute, bioenergy has become an important energy source. Bioenergy is part of a mix of options for address- ing energy concerns and climate change, which includes increased energy efficiency, more renewable energy, 3 This section will not discuss price volatility in detail; but it recognizes its importance. Volatility is shaped by a mix of short-term and long-term factors, including weather variations and export restrictions that are sometimes imposed as a result of drought or flood, rising demand for food, and for some commodities (especially maize and soybean) the growing role of biofuels.