--- On the regional level, the Provincial People’s Congresses of Gansu and Sichuan approved Wetland Conservation Regulations ---

69 MODULE 2: Managing landscapes for Climate-smart agricultural systems During the last forty years the area of degraded peatlands has almost doubled, and less than 20 percent of the peatland remain in good condition (Schumann et al., 2008). Peatland degradation leads to increased GHG emissions. On the other hand, more moderate grazing may reduce methane emissions and carbon sequestration (Chen et al., 2008 and 2009). For this reason, peatland restoration is considered an effective low-cost mitigation tool.

The landscape approach At the farm level, herders fenced parts of the winter pastures near their winter houses to create hay meadows to supply supplementary fodder to animals and decrease grazing pressures on the peatlands in spring. Some core zones of protected areas and peatlands that are important as black neck crane habitats were also fenced to prevent direct grazing.

On the community and local level, pilot projects by national and international organizations supported peatland restoration by replanting vegetation (forage cultivation), rewetting (ditch blocking) and establishing comanagement systems that involved multiple stakeholders in the planning and decision making regarding the diverse uses of rangeland resources.

On the regional level, the Provincial People’s Congresses of Gansu and Sichuan approved Wetland Conservation Regulations in 2007 and 2010 to promote the conservation of biodiversity and enhance the livelihood of local communities. These regulations prohibit drainage and peat mining, promote the reclamation of peatlands and encourage local people and organizations to get involved in peatland restoration. The Provincial People’s Congress of Sichuan allocates 0.3 percent of its yearly budget to peatland restoration. Since 2008, the Chinese government has been working to establish a PES mechanism to compensate local herders for reducing the number of livestock.

On the national level, during the last decade the government of China has encouraged the ecological restoration of degraded rangelands and forage cultivation in winter pastures to reduce grazing pressure on peatlands in winter and spring. Since 2009 the programme ‘Returning grazing to grasslands’ (Tui Mu Huan Cao) in the eastern Tibetan Plateau has provided local herders with payments for ecosystem services when they decrease the number of livestock and fence pastures for hay making or restoration.

Lessons learned and recommendations Human influence on the peatlands and rangelands of the Ruoergai Plateau started long before intensified land use directly affected the peatlands. Today most peatlands on the Ruoergai Plateau show moderate to severe degradation. Prevention of any further degradation and strict protection of the hydrologically important untouched peatlands should be the highest priority.

When they were not backed up by adequate management of grazing intensities, technical approaches to restore peatland functions showed only minor and ephemeral success. This important precondition for restoration and sustainable peat and rangeland use can only be achieved by actively involving local people in decision-making processes. Furthermore, the global benefits for biodiversity conservation and climate change mitigation and the national and regional benefits of water regulation must be directly linked with the local benefits of sustainable livestock production. Awareness raising and educational activities are needed to ensure that local communities understand how these different benefits are inter- related.

The development of an integrated peatland management regime has to respond to the demands of the local population.

The management approach must be acceptable to local communities and be communicated in a comprehensible and consistent way. In Ruoergai County, for example, peatland conservation is the responsibility of the local forestry bureau, whereas rangelands (including grazed peatlands) are managed by the animal husbandry bureau. To achieve optimal landscape management that integrates the interests of all stakeholders, communication and cooperation between the different responsible organizations should be optimized.

The Ruoergai example shows how sound peatland management may serve multiple goals. By keeping groundwater levels high, the peatlands support the productivity of the upland rangelands. By reducing the speed of water flow, the peatlands retain sediments and provide a supply of good quality, well-filtered water. In addition, untouched and restored peatlands provide important soil carbon storage, whereas reduced degradation leads to significantly less carbon dioxide emissions.