--- Uganda National Farmers Federation: climate adaptive approaches to food ---

334
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Stakeholders
The local stakeholders (e.g. farmers and employees of local agriculture-related organizations) who are the
main recipients of the extension training discussed in Section 12.1 are often linked to each other by institutional
arrangements. These may be formal, such as cooperatives and farmer’s unions and organizations1 or informal.
Producer cooperatives and farmers’ unions and organizations
Farmer’s unions, cooperatives and organizations are the most visible stakeholder institutions representing
and supporting local interests at the regional and national levels.
Along with voicing farmers’ interests on a political level, farmers’ organizations also commonly provide or
coordinate demand-driven extension services to their members. Their legitimacy as lobbyists for bottom-up
action makes them important partners for promoting the adoption of CSA-related practices. In bringing about
the transformation to CSA, unions and cooperatives are well-placed to take on key responsibilities, including:
• actively leading their members to embrace CSA principles and practices;
• becoming stronger information and service providers , serving as ‘CSA knowledge platforms’;
• catalyzing carbon fund mobilization and channelling payments for ecosystem services to smallholder farmers;
• serving as policy lobbying and advocacy groups to influence national CSA-related policies; and
• taking a role as value chain actors in promoting carbon footprint labelling in partnership with private companies.

Partnerships between farmers’ unions and decentralized training institutes need to be strengthened to em-
power national farmers’ federations to act as direct, CSA-specific service providers to farmers. Section 12.3
‘Building synergies’ discusses the support platforms or networks for CSA offered by individual institutions.
1 Private sector actors may be considered local stakeholders as well. However, as corporate willingness to train its producers and staff to maximize
results has already been addressed in the previous section, it will not be repeated in this one.
Box 12.8
Uganda National Farmers Federation: climate adaptive approaches to food
security workshops
The Uganda National Farmers Federation (UNFFE) was established in 1992 as the Uganda National Farmers
Association. Today, over 200 000 individual farmers and more than 70 organizations are members, paying a small
annual fee in return for representation and support. This support comes in a variety of forms: policy advocacy,
agricultural trade fairs, market and climate information or extension services and materials (e.g. the UNFFE’s
quarterly publication ‘The Farmer’s Voice’, radio and cassette training sessions, farmer workshops and study tours).
The increasing hardships brought about by climate change, such as late rainfalls or droughts, that agricultural
producers are facing have not gone unnoticed by the UNFFE. To meet the challenge, UNFFE organized, in
collaboration with the Dutch Farmer’s Organization Noord and the pan-African agricultural company Agriterra, a
national workshop and two regional workshops on ‘Climate Adaptive Approaches to Food Security’ in 2012. The
objectives of the workshops were to:
• clarify the link between agricultural development and climate change;
• analyse the potential impacts of climate variability and climate change on the livelihoods of farmers in the pilot-
districts Nakasongola and Sironko;
• identify appropriate adaptation measures taking into account the differences between short, middle and long-
term approaches; and
• optimize communication to members and farmers, by replicating best practices through demonstration farms
and extension services and linking farmers through District Farmers Organizations networks and the UNFFE
national network.
Following discussions of how climate change has been manifesting itself and affecting livelihoods in Uganda, priority
solutions were formulated. These include differentiated directives for government, UNFFE and farm-level actions.
They would also be tested in pilot projects in Nakasongola and Sironko. Once the pilot process has been completed,
the UNFFE intends to mainstream the lessons learned on CSA into its wider support systems.
Source: UNFFE, 2012