--- Page 132 ---

119
MODULE 4: Soils and their management for CSA
Nitrogenous fertilizers are the most widely used fertilizers and deliver huge benefits in terms of productivity,
especially in nutrient-depleted soils. However, these fertilizers also have a high potential for environmental
damage in terms of GHG emissions and nitrate pollution:
• Through the activity of soil micro-organisms, organically-bound nitrogen in soil is mineralized as ammonia
(NH3) and ammonium ions (NH4-) and then transformed (nitrified) into nitrates (Jiang and Bakken, 1999).
Nitrate ions are not attracted to clay and SOM particles (both of which are negatively charged) so they
move freely with the soil water and can be leached from the soil through drainage.
• In addition, in oxygen-limited soils, denitrifying organisms will reduce nitrate to nitrous oxide, a GHG with
about 300 times the warming effect of CO2.
• Finally, cultivation (ploughing and hoeing) disturbs the soil and the formation of new aggregates, which
encourages microbial activity and the rapid mineralization of SOM.
Between 79 and 98 percent of the nitrogen loss from agricultural soils is largely determined by the nitrate con-
tent of the soil just before the rainy season starts (i.e. resulting from the mineralization of organic nitrogen in
the post-harvest season when temperatures are high, not from unused fertilizer applied earlier in the year). It
is estimated that fertilized soils release more than 2 billion tonnes (in terms of CO2 equivalents) of GHGs every
year (Scherr and Sthapit, 2009b).
These GHG emissions can be reduced by achieving greater efficiencies in fuel use for mechanical field opera-
tions and irrigation; making changes in the rates, timing and type of nitrogen fertilizer applications; using slow
release fertilizers that control the formation of nitrates; and adding nitrification inhibitors containing ammo-
nium to fertilizer. These practices will help synchronize the demand and supply of nitrogen.
Agronomic management can also control the biological processes that cause nitrate leaching and produce
GHG emissions. Cropping patterns should provide enough structural carbohydrates (e.g. lignin) along with
nitrogen to allow the nitrogen produced from decaying surface residues to be released slowly and contribute
to the growth of the following crop while minimizing losses (Huggins et al., 1998; Gregorich et al., 2001; Gál et
al., 2007).
There is common consensus that zero tillage and conservation agricul-
ture systems will considerably reduce nitrate leaching (Macdonald et al.,
1989). This is because, unlike mechanical tilling practices, zero tillage
and conservation agriculture leave the soil undisturbed, which decreas-
es mineralization and the subsequent production of nitrates. Cover crops
take up the nitrogen and reduce its loss from the soil. At the same time,
unused mineralized nitrogen remains distributed within smaller pores
and is not washed out of the soil (Bergström, 1995; Davies et al., 1996;
Gors et al., 1993). However, where no-till is used without cover crops and
with herbicides to manage weeds, the effects on nitrogen uptake and
reduced leaching, as well as on yields, may be less evident.

The positive effects of the above principles will be optimized and losses minimized by integrating soil-crop-
water management practices, identifying the spatial variability within the given land area and fields, and using
precision-farming techniques to apply fertilizer and water in ways that are highly efficient and site-specific.
Below, Boxes 4.3 and 4.4 illustrate those principles.
Box 4.2
Inorganic fertilizers
Current
use
of
inorganic
fertilizers is estimated at 102
million
tonnes
worldwide.
Its use is concentrated in
industrial countries and some
irrigated areas of developing
countries.