--- Page 184 ---

Module 6:
Conservation and sustainable
use of genetic resources
for food and agriculture

Overview
This module describes the nature of genetic resources for food and agriculture and outlines why these
resources are essential for climate-smart agriculture. After a brief description of the expected impacts of
climate change on genetic resources for food and agriculture, the module highlights their role in climate
change adaptation and mitigation.
Examples from around the world are used to demonstrate how the conservation and use of the rich ge-
netic diversity of plants and animals both between and within species used for food and agriculture can
benefit present and future generations.
Key messages
• Genetic resources for food and agriculture are the basis for sustainable agriculture and food security.
They are essential elements for increasing the efficiency and resilience of food systems.
• Genetic resources are the raw materials that farmers, breeders and researchers rely upon to improve
the quality and the amount of food produced, and to respond to new conditions, including changes in
climate.
• The conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources provide important options for adapting
agricultural production to the impacts of climate change. Consequently, any loss of genetic diversity
is a threat to the well-being of present and future generations.
• A proper understanding of genetic resources (e.g. inventory, characterization, and monitoring) is a
prerequisite for coping with climate change. A conservation strategy that uses a combination of ex
situ and in situ techniques is most likely to safeguard the genetic diversity required to meet the needs
of present and future generations.
• Ensuring that the appropriate genetic resources with the relevant traits for climate change adapta-
tion and mitigation are available and accessible is crucial. In most countries, a significant part of
the genetic diversity used in food and agriculture originates from other countries. Countries, both
developed and developing are thus interdependent, when it comes to getting access to these genetic
resources to safeguard their food security.