--- Monitoring and Evaluation ---

498 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Assessments for policy and project design usually take place ex-ante. They are aligned with existing policies and programmes and fulfil a variety of functions, including: situation analyses; clarification of central problems and threats in terms of climate impacts and vulnerability; and the identification of effective CSA measures. Assess- ments are conducted mainly in the conceptualization and preparation steps of planning (climate impact assess- ment, CSA options assessment, and baseline projections in Figure 18.1). Based on the assessments, the CSA options to be implemented are identified. In parallel with the broader programme and policy cycle, baseline pro- jections should be revised periodically and the long-term impacts of project interventions should be evaluated after the project ends. Assessments can also directly influence policies and programmes without going through a CSA project cycle. This can be done by using assessment reports in policy discussions, debates and advocacy.

New CSA projects are positioned within the country’s development, agriculture and climate change policies and related programmes. Assessment, monitoring and evaluation start at the preparation stage (project and programme baselines in Figure 18.1), which are followed by project appraisal and approval (detailed indicators and baselines in Figure 18.1). Monitoring of project interventions takes place throughout implementation (in Figure 18.1). At the mid-project cycle and at the end of the project the evaluation of impacts of interventions becomes more important and there is more emphasis on evidence-based measurement of actual impacts of implemented activities. Evaluation of interventions’ impacts at the end of a project will feed into long-term evaluation. Feedback from evaluation of projects may modify policies and programmes.

Continued evaluation beyond the lifetime of a project is recommended to measure the sustainability of the results and the long-term benefits or tradeoffs that are the expected from CSA projects. During project feedback and at the end of a project, lessons learned from evaluating the impacts of the project should be used to inform policy makers.

This feedback may form the basis for a follow-up CSA project and new or suitably modified policies and programmes.

Figure 18.1 The scope of assessment, monitoring and evaluation for CSA within a project cycle and broader policies and programmes (Assessments are initiated in line with policies and programmes) Setting baselines (Assessments may influence policies and programmes directly) (Results of projects may modify policies and programmes) Policies and programmes Project Cycle Conceptualization Preparation Evaluation Implementation Long-term Evaluation Appraisal and approval Climate impact assessment CSA options assessment Baseline projections Evaluation of long-term impacts of interventions Project and programme baselines Assessments for policy and project design Baseline projections / CSA options assessment revised periodically Monitoring and Evaluation Evaluation of impacts of interventions (mid-cycle and end-of- project) Detailed indicators and baselines Monitoring of project interventions Assessments for policy and project design (green background) and monitoring and evaluation (blue background) are color coded respectively.