--- tion Programmes of Actions (NAPAs), National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) and Nationally Appropriate Mitigation ---

330 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK tion Programmes of Actions (NAPAs), National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) and Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), are intended to provide national frameworks to guide government actions on adaptation and mitigation under a future international climate agreement. These voluntary proposals to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) are still under development, so their precise roles are still emerging. The fact that 60 percent of the countries who have submitted NAMAs mention agriculture as a way to reduce GHG emissions (FAO, 2011) suggests these proposals are pertinent mechanisms for institutional- izing governmental commitment to CSA projects at the policy level (see Module 13 on policies and programs).

They should continue to be supported.

Civil society FAO defines ‘civil society’ as ‘the sphere in which citizens and social movements organize themselves around objectives, constituencies and thematic interests’ (FAO, 1999). ‘Civil society organizations’ include non-govern- mental organizations (NGOs, ‘not-for-profit actors who are not governmental or intergovernmental’ (ibid.). They also include trade unions, professional associations, research and educational faculties, private foundations, religious organizations, issue groups, the media and similar organizations reflecting civic interests, values and concerns. Such institutions, acting independently of the state: • voice their members’ interests and demands; • defend their members’ rights; and • take action to meet their members’ wishes and needs. (Uphoff and Krishna, 2004) Civil society has considerable potential to exercise influence by using its collective political voice to express lo- cal climate concerns to higher authorities and demand the provision of specific measures or services (see Box 12.4). To best realize this potential, it is crucial to understand the interrelationships between civil society or- ganizations, the government and the private sector. Though nominally defined as separate from state control, the effective autonomy of civil society institutions varies depending on a number of factors; (e.g. educational institutions are often wholly or partially funded by the state, blurring the distinction between the public sector and civil society). Similarly, the freedom of expression of the media or religious groups may be state-controlled.

A thorough ‘stock-taking’ or ‘mapping’ of the institutions and their interdependencies in a given situation is ad- visable when identifying entry points for CSA initiatives, opportunities for collaboration and potential tensions (Section 12.4 provides some guidelines on how such ‘mapping’ can be approached).

Box 12.4 Civil society policy advocacy: Fisherfolk get organized in the Caribbean Climate change poses a considerable threat to fish-based diets and the livelihoods of fisherfolk in the Caribbean. It is expected to decrease the types and prevalence of marine species, and tropical cyclones of increasing intensity are likely to damage fishing boats and infrastructure, resulting in fewer productive days at sea. However, fisherfolk in the Caribbean have a long history of raising their voices collectively in times of crisis. Building on experiences at national level, the Caribbean Network of Fisherfolk Organisations (CNFO) was formed in 2004 to empower fisherfolk in the region to jointly advocate for government action on climate change.

Beyond aiming to secure national and regional fisheries policies which address the current and anticipated effects of climate change, CNFO seeks to stimulate adaptation planning processes across marine-related sectors. Besides facilitating capacity building and peer-to-peer support among its constituency, the network’s successes to date include having gained observer status on the Caribbean Regional Fisheries Mechanism, undertaking activities in partnership with the fisheries management agencies in many of its member countries and its ongoing contribution to the drafting of a regional Common Fisheries Policy for the region. These accomplishments indicate a promising shift towards the institutionalization of more equitable, inclusive and stakeholder-driven working processes in the region.

Source: Lay et al., 2013