--- An agrophotovoltaic farm in Italy ---

162
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
These examples show that the transition to energy-smart food practices is already under way. Currently how-
ever, the pace of change is slow. For these practices to have a large-scale impact, significant scaling up is
required.
Policies and institutions for energy-smart food and CSA
The promotion and scaling-up of energy-smart food practices requires innovative supportive policies and insti-
tutions. CSA policies and institutions that promote low-carbon farming practices are relevant to energy-smart
food production, as many of these practices promote energy efficiency and renewable energy. Particular atten-
tion should be paid to ensuring participatory gender-sensitive decision-making processes on issues related
to modern energy services. For bioenergy, it is especially important to consider the security of land tenure for
local farmers. Some examples of policies specifically related to energy efficiency and renewable energy are
summarised in Table 5.5.
Box 5.5.
An agrophotovoltaic farm in Italy
In 2011, an agrovoltaic installation was inaugurated in Mantua, Italy. ‘Agrovoltaic’ technology is a production technique
that uses and integrates existing technologies in new ways. It offers farmers the possibility to continue cultivating
their lands while producing clean energy. This also allows farmers to partially shade their land, which permits the
cultivation of a wider range of crops.
The agrophotovoltaic installation, which makes use of recycled and non-pollutant technologies and materials,
consists of a series of photovoltaic panels suspended 5 meters above the ground. These panels produce renewable
electricity with a power capacity of 2.4 megawatts (MW). The installation, realized by REM (Revolution Energy Maker),
a group of Italian entrepreneurs who operate at the national and international level in the sector of electricity
production, is also equipped with a series of accessories that offer additional useful options. One of these options is
a wireless control system that lets users change the panels’ inclination and monitor ground temperature and relative
humidity.

The installation satisfies energy producers’ needs for photovoltaic units to generate renewable energy and farmers’
needs for arable land. It allows land-owners to diversify their incomes, and preserve and optimize the use of the
landscape. By permitting an automatic and programmed management of water distribution and irrigation, this type
of installation offers significant advantages for agriculture and the environment.
The system requires 4 to 5.5 hectares to produce a peak power of 1 MW to install and occupies at most two percent
of the land. Thanks to the omnidirectional dual-axis tracking of the photovoltaic panels, the agrovoltaic system
increases the production of clean energy by 30 percent, compared with fixed panels. The structure can integrate
new automatic systems that support farming, such as systems for watering, the distribution of fertilizers and
phytosanitary inputs and cultivation protection (e.g. anti-hail and shading nets, anti-frost systems). Each tracker can
be equipped with a valve control system that allows an external source to control spray irrigation. The pumping and
the daily biaxial movement would allow the water to disperse evenly.
©FAO/ A. Flammini
©FAO/ A. Flammini