--- In Kenya, the project partners are the World Agroforestry Center (ICRAF) and the East Africa Dairy Development ---

477 MODULE 17: Capacity development for climate-smart agriculture Improving technical and functional capacities across the individual, organizational and policy level In numerous developing countries sector agencies may be developing technical capacities successfully (in- creasing the competencies to intensify production sustainably or manage natural resources more effectively, for example). However, unless such provisions are adequately integrated into planning and policies, it will not be possible to efficiently scale them up. Moreover, non-technical (i.e. functional) capacity development is often not prioritized. These soft skills include the ability to manage personnel and organizations, good gov- ernance principles such as dialogue and communication with stakeholders and resource allocation within policy frameworks that aim for equity and poverty alleviation, transparency and accountability (UNESCO-IHE & UNW-DPC, 2009). Last but not least, the lifelong learning of individuals and organizations is important to keep up with evoking the tasks and trigger innovation. This requires financial, personal and managerial support Box 17.1 Capacity needs assessment: a tool for planning capacity development interventions in CSA projects in Kenya and Tanzania Context In Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania, a FAO Programme has developed pilot projects to help build climate-smart farming systems. The two pilot projects provide capacity development, including technical support to assist smallholder farmers in adopting climate-smart farming practices. During the pilot projects’ initial phase, a capacity needs assessment was undertaken in collaboration with the project partners and FAO country offices.

In Kenya, the project partners are the World Agroforestry Center (ICRAF) and the East Africa Dairy Development Project (EADD). In the United Republic of Tanzania, the project partner is Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere (CARE).

Methodology The objective of the assessments was to identify and prioritize the capacity needs that must be addressed to mainstream climate-smart agriculture into smallholder farming systems given the existing capacities and gaps at the national, district and project level. The assessments served as the starting point for planning capacity development activities and an excellent opportunity to enhance collaboration among all stakeholders.

The methodology used was based on FAO’s Capacity Assessment Toolkit and especially tailored to address climate change adaptation and mitigation in agriculture. The assessments helped identify the main stakeholders, policies, plans and strategies related to climate change already in place. Moreover, the participating stakeholders could assess their own organizational and individual capacities and needs through open discussions and working groups to strengthen ownership. To analyse farmers’ capacities and needs regarding the adoption of climate-smart practices, the assessments considered the different existing agricultural land uses and management practices, as well as topical climatic and environmental problems.

The assessment process was carried out on multiple levels and involved a variety of participatory and consultative activities.

At the national level, a stakeholders’ mapping and context analysis was carried out with representatives from the Ministries of Agriculture, Livestock, Environment, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), research institutions and United Nations agencies working on climate change.

At the district level (project area), consultative workshops were held with project staff, extension officers and district staff from Ministries of Agriculture, Livestock, Water, Forestry and Environment.

At the project and community level, the assessment team organized focus group discussions with farmers and local leaders, interviewed farmers and conducted field visits.

Outcome The assessments in Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania successfully identified entry points for capacity development activities and made recommendations for the promotion and implementation of CSA practices in both pilot projects.

Full assessment reports are available at FAO, 2012a For Tanzania’s report: FOA, 2011b For Kenya’s report: FAO, 2010