--- NGOs. Can contribute ---

344 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Table 12.2 Matrix for the quick institutional context assessment Fictional sample case: an initiative on women’s empowerment in CSA 1) General overview 2) Institutional interests/ mandate 3) Institutional strengths 4) Institutional weaknesses 5) Scope for synergies Sector/Type of institution Name of institution LEAD:

International NGO specializing in environmentally sustainable development. _ Climate-smart development Women’s empowerment Institutional experience implementing development projects Availability of funds Outsider; little local knowledge or legitimacy Can partner with all the below, capitalizing on their strengths and balancing out their weaknesses (see below).

Regional branch of ministry of agriculture _ Rural economic development Sustainable resource management Authority Access to relevant population data Experience delivering agricultural extension services Availability of some funds Overstretched human resources Limited funds Limited experience with CSA or women’s development initiatives Can support its rural development and sustainable resource management by developing women’s earning potential through CSA in partnership with NGOs. Can contribute its authority, technical and site-specific knowledge to the project.

Local women’s rights NGO _ Women’s empowerment Activism and campaigning experience, at national and local level Local knowledge and networks (stakeholder, government, etc) Lacking funds No interaction with policymakers Can bring skills and local socio- cultural expertise to project funded by public sector and international NGO.

Local radio station _ Disseminating information to benefit the public Profit (i.e. producing popular broadcasts) Wide-reaching dissemination of information at low cost Only reaches households with radios Programmes listened to may be determined by the men of the household Can be engaged for a ‘women’s hour’ CSA show, gender equality awareness raising campaigns, etc.

Radios could be distributed to women via women’s faith group.

Women’s faith group _ Faith Mutual support amongst each other and to others Constituent well- being Access to a large number of women, with pre-existing sense of solidarity Authority within wider (mixed) society uncertain (e.g. if perceived to transcend traditional gender roles) Can endorse CSA for women and proliferate messages within the community. Can serve as an access point for talks, or distribution of inputs (e.g. seeds, tools, radios).