--- Save and Grow ---

Module 7:
Climate-smart
crop production system

Overview
Climate-smart crop production contributes to food security, by addressing different aspects of current and
projected climate change impacts through adaptation and mitigation actions. While agriculture contributes
significantly to climate change, it also provides opportunities for adapting to, and mitigating, climate change
effects. The first part of this module outlines the impacts of climate change on crop production. The second
part describes the sustainable crop production intensification (SCPI) paradigm and illustrates how sustain-
able agriculture is inherently “climate-smart.” In describing the underlying principles of SCPI, the module
draws heavily on the FAO publication Save and Grow. Save and Grow — a rich source of information, case
studies and technical references — was produced following an Expert Consultation held in 2010: it is a guide
and toolkit of sustainable technologies and practices, but also explores the policies and institutional arrange-
ments for the large-scale implementation of SCPI. The module also describes options for land managers and
farmers to adapt, and contribute to the mitigation of climate change. Text boxes provide examples of sustain-
able crop production practices, techniques and approaches for climate change adaption and mitigation.
Key messages
• Unpredictable and erratic climatic patterns resulting from climate change will affect crop production.
This will have an impact on farmer livelihoods and food availability. Climate-smart crop production pro-
vides management options to farmers to both adapt to, and mitigate, climate change.
• Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) is sustainable agricultural production “seen from the lens” of climate
change. Sustainable crop production looks at reducing reliance on non-renewable external inputs, and
capitalizing on/enhancing natural biological processes to improve production in a more environmental-
ly-friendly way and avoiding degradation of production relevant natural resources.
• To cope with the challenges of climate change, crop production must adapt (e.g. crop varietal selection,
plant breeding, cropping patterns and ecosystem management approaches) and become resilient to
changes (frequency and intensity).
• Crop production can contribute to mitigating climate change by reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-
sions - for example by reducing the use of/judiciously using inorganic fertilizers, avoiding soil compac-
tion or flooding to reduce methane emissions (e.g. in paddy rice systems) and sequestering carbon (e.g.
planting perennial crops and grass species).
• Farmers are the primary custodians of knowledge about their environment, agro-ecosystems, crops
and cropping patterns, and local climatic patterns. Adapting cropping practices and approaches will be
related to local farmers’ knowledge, requirements and priorities. Sustainable crop production provides
farmers with options for farming sustainably, taking into account the local ecosystem.
• Integrated approaches — such as crop-livestock systems, rice-fish systems and agroforestry — diver-
sify food sources and consequently strengthen the resilience of farmers’ livelihoods. They also provide
opportunities for mitigating climate change.
• CSA needs to be strongly supported by sub-national and local policies. Agricultural ecosystems are site
specific, with their own environmental, social and economic specificities.