--- Page 14 ---

Module 1:
Why climate-smart agriculture,
forestry and fisheries

Overview
Agriculture has to address simultaneously three intertwined challenges: ensuring food security through
increased productivity and income, adapting to climate change and contributing to climate change miti-
gation (FAO, 2010a; Foresight, 2011a; Beddington et al., 2012a; Beddington et al., 2012b; HLPE, 2012a).
Addressing these challenges, exacerbating global pressure on natural resources, especially water, will
require radical changes in our food systems. To address these three intertwined challenges, food sys-
tems have to become, at the same time, more efficient and resilient, at every scale from the farm to
the global level. They have to become more efficient in resource use (use less land, water, and inputs to
produce more food sustainably) and become more resilient to changes and shocks.
It is precisely to articulate these changes that FAO has forged the concept of climate-smart agricul-
ture (CSA) as a way forward for food security in a changing climate. CSA aims to improve food securi-
ty, help communities adapt to climate change and contribute to climate change mitigation by adopting
appropriate practices, developing enabling policies and institutions and mobilizing needed finances.
This module gives an overview of climate smart agriculture, as an approach to address in an inte-
grated way the interlinked challenges of food security and climate change. The first section describes
the challenges to be addressed. It briefly recalls the current state of food insecurity and prospective
of population and food demand growth. The main impacts of climate change on agriculture are sum-
marized as well as the contribution of agriculture to global greenhouse gas emissions. The second
section shows how two joint principles guide the necessary changes of systems: more efficiency in
the use of resources, to increase production while reducing emissions intensity of the food produced
and consumed and more resilience, to get prepared to variability and change. The third section briefly
touches upon some of the issues to be addressed to implement climate-smart agriculture and pro-
gress towards efficient and resilient food systems. It requires comprehensive policies at every level,
adequate institutions and proper governance to make the necessary choices. It also requires new
financing to address the needs in terms of investments and research and to enable the farmers to
overcome barriers to adoption of new practices including up-front costs and income foregone during
the transition period. The last section articulates the concept of CSA closely linked issues of sustain-
able intensification, green growth and sustainable development.