--- Prevention of major Desert Locust upsurges in West and Northwest Africa ---

20 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Resilience puts a greater emphasis on the capacity of a system to recover and transform itself over the long term, and adapt to its changing environment in a dynamic perspective. It implies that it is not only shocks, as a change relative to an average, that have to be considered, but also the change of the average itself. Ultimately, the question is until what point can a system adapt before changing to another type of system?

Building resilience To a great extent increasing resilience can be achieved by reducing vulnerabilities and increasing adaptive capacity. This can be done by reducing exposure to risk, reducing sensitivity and increasing adaptive capacity for every type of risk. It can act in each domain, either biophysical or economic and social. One way to achieve better resilience is to reduce transmission of shocks between types of risks, between scales and between do- mains and to organize compensation between scales (for instance transport of feed) or between domains (for instance safety nets) to avoid cumulative and long-term effects.

In a first approximation we can identify the following three ways to build resilience: 1.Reduce exposure. There is a fundamental difference between climatic and non-climatic shocks in this regard because most of the shocks on farm can be reduced at the source, or limited in their extension, contrary to climatic shocks. The best example of a non-climatic shock is probably the eradication of Rin- derpest, which has totally suppressed a major risk for livestock and those depending on it. 2.Reduce the sensitivity of systems to shocks. Using drought-resistant varieties or keeping adequate stocks of hay can for instance, reduce sensitivity to drought. 3.Increase adaptive capacity. This includes considering the modifications of a system and taking into account all the potential shocks and changes together (to take into account compensating, cumulative or exacer- bating effects).

Finally, we have to consider that the occurrence of shocks is not certain. The nature of the shock may be un- certain as well as the nature or size of its impacts. In addition, their occurrence in time is generally unknown.

Box 1.5 Prevention of major Desert Locust upsurges in West and Northwest Africa Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases (EMPRES Programme) The Desert Locust is a highly destructive transboundary plant pest that threatens people’s livelihoods, food security, the environment and economic development in more than 30 countries. In terms of bio-ecology, West and Northwest Africa (Western Region) is an indivisible distribution area of this pest. In that area more than 8 million people faced severe food shortage as a result of the 2003-2005 Desert Locust upsurge. It cost the international community and affected countries over USD 570 million to overcome it and 13 million litres of chemical pesticides were applied. The Sahelian countries also suffered from high crop losses ranging from 30 to 100 percent. To address the Desert Locust issue more effectively, the Western Region countries (Algeria, Burkina Faso, Chad, Libya, Mali, Morocco, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal and Tunisia) set up in 2002 the Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Western Region (CLCPRO) under the aegis of FAO. To implement a sustainable preventive control strategy, they also joined the FAO EMPRES Programme, launched in 2006 in the Western Region. The Evaluation Missions of Phase 1 (2006-2010) of this Programme underlined that substantial progress had been made in achieving the objectives, in particular, in the frontline countries (Chad, Mali, Mauritania and Niger) in terms of: institutional building with the creation of autonomous National Locust Control Units (NLCUs); strengthening of locust control capacities and infrastructure; implementation of early warning systems and rapid interventions, developing health and environmental standards, and better preparedness to Desert Locust crises (ongoing contingency planning).

The improvement of more effective preventive control strategy became obvious during the control operations against locust outbreaks in 2006, 2008, 2009 and 2010-2011 in Mauritania and in 2009 in Niger. Also, a gradual funding of the recurrent costs for preventive control implemented by the NLCUs from the national budgets was observed: from 10 percent in 2006, it reached an average of 60 percent in the frontline countries at the end of 2010. The annual cost of preventive control in the Western Region is USD 3.3 million, less then 0.6 percent of the expenses incurred during the 2003-2005 major outbreak.

Source: Brader et al., 2006; Cossée et al., 2009