--- The World Agroforestry Center (ICRAF)’s land degradation surveillance ---

506 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Baselines and baseline projections If climate impact assessments and CSA options assessments are carried out for a given point in time or for the projected future conditions, they constitute a baseline or baseline projection that are relevant for the evalua- tion of impacts of a particular policy, project or programme (Figure 18.5) and for the monitoring of outputs and progress towards outcomes and impacts along the way. Examples of variables used to measure baselines are shown in Table 18.5.

Figure 18.5 Baselines and baseline projections Climate change effect (e.g. availability of water) Time Project duration Observed trend Long-term baseline projection CSA project baseline State at end of project for evaluation Situation (without project) assuming no baseline change Control (without project) = shifted baseline Based on climate impact assessments, baseline projections can be developed for expected future climate variations, associated variations in agricultural outputs and respective vulnerabilities. These are projections of the state of climate impacts, agriculture, and food security and vulnerability without the programme’s or project’s interventions. This ‘without intervention’ scenario helps to frame broader policies and programmes (see Figure 18.1). Baseline projections provide ‘counterfactuals’ and are used to evaluate long-term impacts of CSA and related interventions at a longer time scale than typical development projects.

Box 18.1 Land degradation surveillance framework The World Agroforestry Center (ICRAF)’s land degradation surveillance framework (LDSF) establishes a biophysical baseline at the plot and landscape levels. It also provides a monitoring and evaluation framework for assessing the processes of land degradation and the effectiveness of rehabilitation measures over time. The LDSF collects information on land use, vegetative cover, soil properties and topography using hierarchical field survey and sampling protocols. FAO’s Mitigation of Climate Change in Agriculture (MICCA) Programme implements the LDSF in East Africa as a tool for measuring the baseline for land health in pilot projects. There are three additional primary data collection activities (GHG emissions and agricultural productivity, carbon balance, and socio-economic indicators) to monitor changes in socio-economic and environmental conditions.

The figure below shows an example of LDSF hierarchical sampling design used to establish baseline soil and vegetation information. Ten subplots (red points) are selected at random from 16 clusters within a 10 x 10 km.

Source: Adapted from Vågen et al., 2010