--- Save and Grow – More Sustainable Intensification ---

11 MODULE 1: Why Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries The inclusion of legumes in crop rotations exploits symbiotic microbes to fix nitrogen, which is harvested in the crop and partly transferred to subsequent crops increasing their yields. In forage legume/grass mix- tures, nitrogen is also transferred from legume to grass, increasing pasture production. The protein content of legumes makes them important from a nutritional point of view. When included in livestock feed, legumes increase the food conversion ratio and decrease methane emissions from ruminants, thus increasing ef- ficiency and at the same time reducing GHG emissions. By providing proteins and the amino acid lysine, in which cereals are deficient, legumes complement cereals in human diets and can compensate for the lack of animal proteins. Unfortunately, the global area under pulses dropped from approximately 5 million hectares in 1968 to 3.9 million in 2007. Globally, consumption of pulses in terms of kilocalories per capita per day also dropped from 73 in 1968 to 57 in 2007.

Sustainable intensification of crop production (see box 2) aims to increase yields through the better use of natural resources and ecosystem functions.

Plant breeding has a crucial role to play to enhance genetic potential both to increase productivity and thus yields and to improve nutrient and water use as well as resistance to climate variability, diseases and pests.

Increase resource efficiency in livestock production The livestock sector has expanded rapidly in recent decades and will continue to do so as demand for meat, eggs and dairy products is expected to continue to grow, especially in developing countries. Livestock graz- ing already occupies 26 percent of the earth’s ice-free land surface, and the production of livestock feed uses 33 percent of agricultural cropland (Steinfeld et al., 2006). There is an urgent need to improve the resource use and production efficiency of livestock production systems, both to improve food security and reduce the intensity of GHG emissions (FAO, 2009a; HLPE, 2012a). These efforts need to take into account the grow- ing dichotomy between livestock kept by large numbers of small holders and pastoralists and those kept in Box 1.2 Save and Grow – More Sustainable Intensification Sustainable crop production intensification (SCPI) can be summed up in the words “Save and Grow”. Sustainable intensification means a productive agriculture that conserves and enhances natural resources. It uses an ecosystem approach that draws on nature’s contribution to crop growth – soil organic matter, water flow regulation, pollination and natural predation of pests. It applies appropriate external inputs at the right time, in the right amount to improved crop varieties that are resilient to climate change. It also uses nutrients, water and external inputs more efficiently.

Increasing the sustainable intensification of crop production is achievable. This can be done through increasing resource use efficiency and cutting the use of fossil fuels. This saves money for farmers and prevents the negative effect of over-use of particular inputs. Inefficient fertilizer use is common in many regions. In some cases, this is a consequence of government subsidies. Yet over-use does not have the intended impact on plant growth and can result in the contamination of ground and surface water. Inappropriate insecticide use may actually induce pest outbreaks by disrupting the natural population of predators. Overuse of herbicides can lead to the emergence of herbicide-tolerant varieties of weeds. Problems of salinization or reduced soil health may also come from inappropriate management practices, such as irrigating without proper drainage. Better maintenance of ecosystem services can be accomplished through: adopting agricultural practices that are based on crop rotations, applying minimum tillage and maintaining soil cover; relying on natural processes of predation or biocontrol of pest or weed problems; managing pollination services; selecting diverse and appropriate varieties; and carefully targeting the use of external inputs. These practices are knowledge-intensive and they are often also interdependent. In the initial stages, encouraging these practices may require public support through targeted incentives and investment. Ideally, the price of agricultural commodities would increasingly reflect the full cost of production, including the potential damage done to natural ecosystems, thereby encouraging more sustainable consumption (FAO, 2011b).