--- The Sustainable Agriculture in a Changing Climate (SACC) project ---

326 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK How can institutions support CSA?

Institutions can support smallholder farmers in three vital areas: 1. Producing and sharing technical knowledge For relatively resource-poor smallholder farmers, putting CSA into practice requires knowledge and sup- port. Farmers, herders and fishing communities need easier and more affordable access to the information that underpins innovative CSA practices. Institutions that produce and share information and help people translate this information into knowledge and action are essential. These institutions include: farmer field schools (or similar approaches that train and enable farmers to adopt new techniques); farm radio shows that provide easily accessible, useful and useable (i.e. needs-driven) agricultural and weather-related in- formation to rural households; local agricultural demonstration plots and events; and farmer-to-farmer exchanges. 2. Providing financial services, credit and access to markets The benefits gained by adopting sustainable land management techniques usually take time to material- ize. In the meantime, the farmers must bear the costs in terms of labour, land and cash (McCarthy et al., 2011). As a result, poor farmers lacking access to credit and markets are unable to adopt these techniques.

This is why strengthening institutions to support agricultural markets, financing mechanisms and insur- ance schemes are critical for the CSA’s success. These institutions include organizations and institutional arrangements providing credit, insurance, social safety nets, and payments or rewards for environmental services. Module 14 addresses in detail the financial instruments and investments that enable CSA. 3. Supporting the coordination of collaborative action Collective action is critical for managing communal forests and pastures and lowering transactions costs.

Box 12.1 The Sustainable Agriculture in a Changing Climate (SACC) project The Sustainable Agriculture in a Changing Climate project (SACC), a partnership between CARE, the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) and the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) with funding from the Rockefeller Foundation, began in September 2010. The project was originally intended to deliver payments to smallholder farmers from carbon markets for carbon stored through the adoption of agroforestry practices in the Nyando River Basin in Western Kenya, a mixed crop-livestock farming area with high levels of poverty and significant environmental degradation.

Alongside planting the trees that would generate carbon payments in the long run, the project also introduced interventions designed to provide immediate short-term income and food benefits, as a way of overcoming resource constraints and maximizing the participation of resource-poor women. These shorter-term interventions included: the introduction of early-maturing, drought-resistant and higher-value crops; an emphasis on sustainable agricultural practices; and the formation of linkages with a complementary project on Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLAs, community-based informal financial groups). Based on lessons learned in the first phase, SACC is transitioning into a ‘climate-smart smallholder agriculture’ approach, with an emphasis on research and actions aimed at improved agricultural productivity and farm-level adaptation. The income and livelihood benefits from enhanced knowledge and access to tree seedlings, improved seeds and land management techniques are proving to provide the key incentives for entering the scheme, rather than carbon sales (Thorlakson and Neufeldt, 2012).

The project relies on institutions which support people in changing their behaviour. These include small savings and loans groups that help change peoples’ attitudes about money and encourage them to start saving, often for the first time ever. Village management committees that mobilize farmers, coordinate resource persons, monitor activities and manage benefit sharing through innovative new means (such as payments via cell phone) are also important.

New institutions providing access to markets and inputs are emerging. A professional independent company is being formed to manage the programme in the long-run. The success of the new CSA project is highly dependent on an effective, efficient and equitable governance structure, which will be essential for delivering the product (carbon) to the client (offset markets).

Source: CCAFS and CGIAR, 2012a