--- Urea Deep Placement ---

10
CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK
Sustainable intensification would be particularly efficient in areas where very low productivity systems, such
as shifting cultivation in the Congo Basin, are replacing forests (Bellassen and Gitz, 2008; West et al., 2010),
comparing worldwide crop yields and carbon stocks, consider that concentrating reforestation and avoided
deforestation in the tropics would have the greatest worldwide carbon sink effect with minimum opportunity
costs in terms of reduced crop yields.
Studies (Fischer et al., 2009) have shown the importance in many developing countries of the yield gap. The
yield gap is the difference between actual farm yields, as represented by the average yield achieved by farm-
ers in a defined region over several seasons, and the potential yields which are the maximum achievable yield
with latest varieties and by removing as much as possible all the constraints as achieved in highly controlled
experimental stations. Reducing this gap is essential to improve food security and reduce deforestation.
Nutrients are essential to increase yields. But production of synthetic fertilizers is energy intensive, with high
CO2 emissions and economic costs. In addition, when applied in the field, these fertilizers contribute to N2O
emissions. Therefore, there is a need to improve fertilization and to limit the economic costs and the emis-
sions at the same time. Improving fertilizer efficiency is thus essential. This can be done through a variety of
techniques. One way is to match more precisely the nutrients with plant needs during the growing season,
such as by fractioning the total amount in multiple doses. Other techniques include precision farming and
placing nutrients closer to plant roots, such as deep placement of urea for rice (see box 1.1).
Box 1.1
Urea Deep Placement
Urea Deep Placement (UDP) technique, developed by the International Fertilizer Development Center (IFDC), is
a good example of a climate-smart solution for rice systems. The usual technique for applying urea, the main
nitrogen fertilizer for rice, is through a broadcast application. This is a very inefficient practice, with 60 to 70
percent nitrogen losses contributing to GHG emissions and water pollution.
In the UDP technique, urea is made into “briquettes” of 1 to 3 grams that are placed at 7 to 10 cm soil depth after
the paddy is transplanted. This technique decreases nitrogen losses by 40 percent and increases urea efficiency
to 50 percent. It increases yields by 25 percent with an average 25 percent decrease in urea use.
UDP has been actively promoted by the Bangladesh Department of Agricultural Extension with IFDC assistance.
In 2009, UDP was used on half a million hectares by a million farmers and there are plans to expand its use to
2.9 million more families on 1.5 million hectares.
The widespread adoption of the UDP technique in Bangladesh has had several important impacts:
• Farmers’ incomes have increased because of both increased yields and reduced fertilizers use.
• Jobs have been created locally in small enterprises, often owned by women, to make the briquettes. There are
now 2 500 briquette-making machines in Bangladesh.
• On-farm jobs have also been created as the briquettes are placed by hand, which requires 6 to 8 days labour
per hectare. Higher yields and savings on fertilizer expenditures compensate for the additional field labour
expenses.
• At the national level, imports of urea have been reduced, with savings in import costs estimated by IFDC
at USD 22 million and in government subsidies of USD 14 million (2008), for an increase of production of
268 000 metric tons.
• At a global level UDP has reduced GHG emissions caused by the production and management of fertilizers.

It also increases the agricultural system’s resilience. As fertilizer prices are linked to energy prices, and
consequently very volatile, reducing fertilizer use also increases farm and country’s resilience to economic shocks.
With the effectiveness of the technique now well proven, UDP is being scaled up, partly through South/South
cooperation. For instance, the National Programme for Food Security of Nigeria (NPFS) is supported by South/
South cooperation with China. This support includes the promotion and development of the UDP technique in
several Nigerian states.
Source: Roy & Misra, 2003; Singh et al., 2010; Ladha et al., 2000; IFDC, 2011