--- Source: FAO, 2011a ---

163 MODULE 5: Sound Management of Energy for CSA Table 5.5 Examples of policy instruments to promote energy efficiency and renewable energy Energy efficiency Renewable energy The introduction of freight truck fuel economy standards and payload limits Minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) for machinery is used in food systems Energy performance labels on appliances Vehicle speed restrictions Packaging recycling regulations Higher charges for landfill disposal of organic wastes Capacity building, research, education and communication Promotion of renewable energy markets Financial incentives, such as tax exemption, feed-in tariffs and tradable certificate-based renewable energy obligations Standards, permits and building codes Alternatives to landfill with an energy component (e.g. incineration with energy recovery methane capture from landfill) Capacity building, research, education and communication Source: FAO, 2011a Energy-smart food interventions that lead to reduced CO2 emissions (renewable energy or energy efficiency interventions) can make use of many of the climate change financial mechanisms discussed in Module 14 on financial instruments and investments. In addition, there are financing sources especially targeted for renew- able energy use, energy efficiency and increased energy access. These include: innovative business models like energy service companies (ESCOs)6; financial instruments, such as feed-in-tariffs; tradable certificates; integrated municipal arrangements; and public-private funding schemes.

Thailand is a country that has enacted several policies that are favourable to renewable energy. Regulations were adopted in 2002 to simplify the grid connection requirements for small electricity generators up to 1 meg- awatt (MW) (World Bank, 2011). This and other policies led to the development of integrated sugarcane and rice biorefineries that produce food, ethanol, heat and electricity. In addition, organic residues were returned to the soil, increasing soil fertility. By 2008, 73 biomass projects using a variety of residues, including bagasse and rice husks, had been developed with an installed capacity of 1 689 MW (IPCC, 2011).

Implementing such policies requires innovative institutional mechanisms. Again, it should be noted that ag- ricultural institutions that promote low-carbon agriculture also contribute to the production of energy-smart food. The division of labour and financial instruments are other elements that must be taken into account by institutional mechanisms that work to promote concern about integrated food-energy systems (FAO, 2011a).

Examples in this are listed below. • In parts of the United Kingdom where farmers are producing wheat, a bioelectricity plant buys the straw through a subsidiary company that collects the farmers’ straw. Seventy percent of the fuel needed to run the bioelectricity plant comes from the straw feedstock, the rest from another feedstock and natural gas. In this system, farmers produce wheat and leave energy matters to more competent players (Bogdanski et al., 2010). • At the district model biogas farm in China, farmers cultivate crops and are not responsible for raising pigs and producing the biogas themselves. Instead, the farmers contribute money to the district pig farm for purchasing the pigs. The district farm is responsible for raising the pigs and generating the energy. The farmers get in return yearly dividends from any sales of pigs, cheap biogas and cheap liquid fertilizer from the district farm. • In Bangladesh, two innovative business schemes are tapping into the private sector’s needs for bioferti- lizer to drive the development of household biomass production for energy (ISD, 2010). One scheme seeks to create a steady supply of bioenergy through a cattle-leasing programme. Programme participants, who 6 An energy service company is a commercial business providing a broad range of comprehensive energy solutions including designs and implementation of energy savings projects, energy conservation, power generation and energy supply, energy infrastructure outsourcing and risk management.