--- Reduce, Reuse, Recycle: ---

555 Glossary Rainfed agriculture: Agricultural practice relying exclusively on rainfall as its source of water.

Reduce, Reuse, Recycle: The ‘3 R’s’’ of waste management. Reduction refers to minimizing the amount of waste generated from a given operation or process. Reuse refers to using the waste material “as is”— such as using waste oil for fuel. Recycling refers to reclaiming materials from the waste product or transforming the waste product into new products.

Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD): REDD is a mechanism to create an incentive for developing countries to protect, better manage and wisely use their forest resources, contribut- ing to the global fight against climate change. REDD strategies aim to make forests more valuable standing than they would be cut down by creating a financial value for the carbon stored in trees. Once this carbon is assessed and quantified, the final phase of REDD involves developed countries paying developing countries carbon offsets for their standing forests. REDD is a cutting-edge forestry initiative that aims at tipping the economic balance in favour of sustainable management of forests so that their formidable economic, environ- mental and social goods and services benefit countries, communities, biodiversity and forest users while also contributing to important reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.

Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Plus (REDD+): REDD+ strategies go beyond deforestation and forest degradation, and include the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in reducing emissions.

Reforestation: The re-establishment of forest formations after a temporary condition with less than 10 percent of canopy cover due to human-induced or natural perturbations. (FAO, 2000a) Residual feed intake: The difference between an animal’s actual feed intake and its expected feed require- ments for maintenance and growth.

Resilience: The ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner.

Riparian: Relating to land adjoining a stream or river.

Risk: The combination of the probability of an event and its negative consequences.

Risk assessment: A methodology to determine the nature and extent of risk by analysing potential hazards and evaluating existing conditions of vulnerability that together could potentially harm exposed people, property, services, livelihoods and the environment on which they depend.

Safety nets: A sub-set of broader social protection systems. Safety nets mostly include non-contributory trans- fers, such as in-kind food, cash or vouchers; they can be provided conditionally or unconditionally, and can be targeted or universal in coverage. Safety nets may also include other interventions to improve access to food and basic essentials, such as price subsidies. The terms safety nets, social safety nets, social transfers and social assistance are often used interchangeably.

Salinisation: The accumulation of salts in soils.

Sensitivity (to climate variability or change): Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either ad- versely or beneficially, by climate variability or change. The effect may be direct (e.g. a change in crop yield in response to a change in the mean, range or variability of temperature) or indirect (e.g. damages caused by an increase in the frequency of coastal flooding due to sea-level rise).