--- Joint Implementation (JI): ---

553 Glossary Integrated landscape management: An umbrella term for natural resource management systems that rec- ognize the value of various ecosystem services to multiple stakeholders, and how this leads them to pursue different land use objectives or livelihood strategies.

Integrated pest management: An ecosystem approach to crop production and protection that combines differ- ent management strategies and practices to grow healthy crops and minimize the use of pesticides.

Joint Implementation (JI): Market-based implementation mechanism defined in Article 6 of the Kyoto Proto- col, allowing Annex I countries or companies from these countries to implement projects jointly that limit or reduce emissions or enhance sinks, and to share the Emissions Reduction Units. JI activity is also permitted in Article 4.2(a) of the Framework Convention on Climate Change.

Kyoto protocol: The Kyoto Protocol to the Framework Convention on Climate Change () was adopted at the Third Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP) in 1997 in Kyoto. It contains legally binding commit- ments, in addition to those included in the UNFCCC. Annex B countries agreed to reduce their anthropogenic GHG emissions (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride) by at least 5 percent below 1990 levels in the commitment period 2008-2012. The Kyoto Protocol came into force on 16 February 2005.

Land grabbing: Controversial large-scale land acquisitions by domestic and transnational companies, govern- ments, or individuals, which result in the disenfranchisement of the poor. The term has gained currency since the large-scale land acquisitions following the 2007-2008 world food price crisis.

Landscape: Agricultural landscapes can be described in terms of the three elements: (i) structure – the inter- action between environmental features, land use patterns and man-made objects; (ii) functions – the provi- sion of landscape functions for farmers and for society (environmental services); and (iii) value – concerning the value the society places on agricultural landscape and the costs of maintaining and enhancing landscape provisions by agriculture. Because the underlying human and natural processes are subject to change and evolution, landscapes are dynamic systems.

Landscape approach: Landscape approach means the management of production systems and natural re- sources in an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services and small enough to be managed by the people using the land and producing those services.

Low regret options: see no regret options Maladaptation: Any changes in natural or human systems that inadvertently increase vulnerability to climatic stimuli; an adaptation that does not succeed in reducing vulnerability but increases it instead.

Microfinance: The provision of credit and other financial services to small businesses which typically do not have access to such services, aiming to foster economic development.

Mitigation (in relation to climate change): Technological change and substitution that reduces resource inputs and emissions per unit of output. Although several social, economic and technological policies would produce an emission reduction, with respect to climate change, mitigation means implementing policies to reduce GHG emissions and enhance sinks.

Mitigation (in relation to hazard): The limiting or lessening of the adverse impacts of hazards and related dis- asters.

National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs): Documents prepared by least developed countries (LDCs) that identify the activities to address urgent and immediate needs for adapting to climate change.