--- Page 533 ---

520 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK 1.Validity: Does the indicator measure a change in climate risk or vulnerability? 2.Precise and specific meaning: Do stakeholders agree on exactly what the indicator measures in this con- text? 3.Practical, affordable, and simple: Are climate- and adaptation-relevant data actually available at reason- able cost and effort? Will it be realistic to collect and analyse information? 4.Reliability: Can the indicator be consistently measured against the adaptation baseline over the short, me- dium and long term? With regard to mitigation, are the indicators robust enough for formal auditing under measurement, reporting and verification (MRV)? 5.Sensitivity: When the respective climatic effects or adaptive behaviours change, is the indicator suscepti- ble to those changes? 6.Clear direction: Is it certain that an increase in value is good or bad and for which particular aspect of adaptation? Is it ultimately attributable to intervention? 7.Utility: Will the information collected be useful and relevant for adaptive management, results account- ability, and learning? Does it measure achievable results? 8.Owned: Do stakeholders agree that this indicator makes sense for testing the adaptation hypothesis?

Using a simplified typology, indicators can be classified into four types. Each type of indicator is important for measuring outputs, outcomes and impacts in relation to climate change interventions. The four types of indi- cators are: • Quantitative (e.g. tonnes per hectare of incremental crop production, number of days a year a household has adequate meals, or number of men and women with increased income); • Qualitative (e.g. beneficiary perception of satisfactory service delivery by intervention agency); • Proxy indicators, which give an approximation of a desired measure, where a direct indicator is difficult to assess; and • Indices, which are composed from other indicators to provide a more simplified aggregate measure of change.

Proxy indicators are by their nature indirect measures. In the end, most indicators have to be screened and chosen pragmatically so that they best fit specific needs. The selection process will create a shortlist of in- dicators, some more direct and others more indirect, that capture a wide range of possible effects. Poverty measures, for example, are the results of a range of interventions and external forces. Adoption of a particular cropping pattern may be largely due to a project intervention, but also to other explicit or unspoken choices by farmers.

In addition, as mentioned above, it is important to highlight process-based indicators as well as outcome-based indicators. Both types of indicators are important and have their own particular advantages and disadvantages.

Villanueva (2010) suggests the Adaptive, Dynamic, Active, Participatory and Thorough (ADAPT) framework with indicators that are more process-oriented. It is worth emphasizing the need to look at what has been put in place to strengthen adaptation and adaptive capacity outcomes. These outcomes are important even if events to test the adaptation may not take place during the intervention period (e.g. infrequent but stronger extreme events, such as large floods and hurricanes).

Range of indicators According to the definition of CSA, climate change adaptation and mitigation interventions in the agricultural sector should lead to increased productivity, improved resilience to climate risks, reduced GHG emissions, greater GHG uptake and enhanced achievement of national food security and development goals.

Indicators for monitoring and evaluating projects’ impact should try to reflect these objectives. Some examples include: