--- Page 129 ---

116 CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE SOURCEBOOK Preventing and mitigating land degradation Soils that have been degraded are at much greater risk from the damaging impacts of climate change. Degrad- ed soils are vulnerable due to serious losses of SOM and soil biodiversity, greater soil compaction and increased rates of soil erosion and landslides. In addition, land degradation is itself a major cause of climate change. It is estimated that overall, land use and land use changes account for around 31 percent of total human-induced GHG emissions (Scherr and Sthapit, 2009b). In the 1990s, 56 percent of the world’s cropland (65 percent in Af- rica, 38 percent in Asia and 51 percent in Latin America and the Caribbean) and 73 percent of rangelands were estimated to be degraded (Oldeman, 1992; Dregne and Chou, 1992). About 22 percent of these lands have been degraded since the 1950s.

Various sources suggest that about 5-10 million hectares are being lost annually to severe degradation. Declin- ing yields (or increased input requirements to compensate) can be expected over a much larger area. These losses results from: physical degradation by water and wind, crusting, sealing and waterlogging; biological degradation due to the depletion of organic matter depletion and loss of soil flora and fauna; and chemical deg- radation by acidification, nutrient depletion, pollution from excessive use of pesticides and fertilizers or human and industrial waste.

Unsustainable land management practices that are degrading soils include: continuous cropping with reduc- tions in fallow and rotations, repetitive tillage and soil nutrient mining; overstocking, overgrazing and burning of rangelands; and the overexploitation or clearance of wooded and forest lands. During a time of rising demand for food, fibre, fuel, freshwater, fodder, timber and household energy, these practices are reducing the produc- tive capacities of the world’s croplands, rangelands and forests.

There is a need for greater policy support and investment in identifying and promoting appropriate production sys- tems and management practices that simultaneously reverse or minimize degradation, conserve above- and below- ground biodiversity, sequester carbon, reduce GHG emissions and at the same time ensure sustained productivity.

Controlling soil erosion Soil erosion is a widespread and serious degradation process. Intense rains can cause devastating soil erosion on cultivated lands on moderate to steep slopes where runoff rates are high and the ground has inadequate vegetative cover. Studies have identified tillage-induced soil erosion as the major cause of the severe soil carbon loss and soil translocation on upland landscapes (Lobb et al., 1995; Lobb and Lindstrom, 1999; Reicosky et al., 2005). Even on gradual slopes, alkaline soils may suffer from dispersion or crusting that will increase soil ero- sion risk. Runoff and resulting soil erosion can be substantially reduced through the adoption of minimum to no- tillage techniques combined with optimizing soil cover (cover crops, residues, mulch). On steeper slopes, soil erosion can also be reduced by planting cross-slope vegetation; using soil and water conservation structures, such as terraces, earth bunds and tied ridges to optimize water capture and infiltration; and creating grassed waterways to convey excess water safely off the slopes.

Increased incidence of windstorms could also accelerate soil erosion as the blown sand may be deposited on productive land or sand dunes may encroach on these lands. Measures to reduce erosion by wind include opti- mizing vegetation cover with drought-resistant species, using rotational grazing to sustain rangeland vegetation quality, and planting windbreaks perpendicular to the prevailing winds.

Improving water storage Water storage in the soil depends on many factors, including rainfall, soil depth, soil texture (clay content) and soil structure. Soil management can influence rainwater infiltration and the capacity of the soil to reduce soil water evaporation and store water in the soil. Groundcover management can have highly beneficial effects on soil surface conditions, SOM content, soil structure, porosity, aeration and bulk density. Improvements in these properties influence infiltration rates, water storage potential and water availability to plants. These improve- ments also increase the effectiveness of rainfall and enhance productivity. They also reduce rates of erosion, the dispersion of soil particles and the risks of waterlogging and salinity in drylands.