--- A study undertaken by Sengar ---

301 MODULE 11: Developing sustainable and inclusive food value chains for Climate-smart agriculture As in the previous example, the following low cost, improved and locally produced processing technology (see Box 11.2) has increased the quantity and quality of the product, thereby increasing incomes. Moreover, due to the use of solar energy, it does not contribute to the release of GHG emissions (see more on energy-smart food systems in Module 5).

Food distribution, marketing and retail stage Distribution and transportation In developing countries food is lost and wasted throughout the food chain due to distribution and transporta- tion problems. Issues include whether roads exist at all, whether roads and vehicles are kept in good repair, whether roads are also accessible during the rainy season and whether roads are passable by large vehicles.

Transportation conditions Poor transport conditions can easily damage products. For example, vehicles that are overloaded, products that are poorly packaged or carried in an unsuitable vehicle and insufficient ventilation and cooling all increase the amount of post-harvest losses. In addition, the amount of time it takes for a product to reach the consumer contributes to losses, because the longer the product is under the sun or in humid or in other weather condi- tions, the shorter its life span. This is because fruits and vegetables easily spoil and damage as they contain 65 to 95 percent of water and as soon as their food and water reserves are depleted, the product deteriorates and perishes and may become inedible before it reaches the consumer. Therefore, they need to be marketed as soon as they are harvested. Therefore, the transportation of the harvested produce should be planned in advance so that losses can be minimized (Parfitt et al., 2010; Kitinoja, 2011).

Road infrastructure Transportation costs as well as the price of products increase with poor road infrastructure. A study by Minten and Kyle (1999) in Zaire showed that transportation costs made up one-quarter to one-third of the wholesale price of domestic products due to the poor conditions of rural roads. Increasing efficiency means increasing the efficiency of infrastructural systems (FAO, 2009). Furthermore, not only limited infrastructure, but also the lack of transport is one of the barriers that smallholders face. As a result, some smallholder farmers are not able to access markets and thus are not able to generate income.

Box 11.2 Low cost fish solar dryer Sun drying is one of the traditional methods to preserve and process fish. During sun drying, moisture is removed from the produce so that the product can be stored for certain periods of time. Sun drying, which is the most common form of drying, has some disadvantages, such as direct exposure to adverse weather conditions, generally lower drying temperatures, longer drying times, poor final quality and the possibility of contamination by insects, birds, animals. An improved practice of sun drying is solar drying.

Solar drying shortens the drying time due to higher temperatures being generated. The solar dryers do not necessarily protect the product against the sun, but they protect it against rain, insects, animals and contamination from other sources. Solar dryers have a simple structure that usually consist of a wooden or bamboo-frame table, which is covered with plastic or glass or other material that is locally available. The material can be painted black so that the heat of the sun will be absorbed. The solar dryer has openings at the top and at the bottom of the drier so that the heated air will flow through the structure and will decrease the moisture content of the fish. Various structures have been established in different countries, including in Bangladesh, Indonesia, Rwanda, the Philippines and Papua New Guinea. Studies have shown that solar driers can increase drying rates and produce lower moisture content in the final products, which results in improvements in fish quality and reduction in losses compared to traditional sun drying techniques (OIA, 1988; Bala and Janjai, 2009; Davies and Davies, 2009; Sengar et al., 2009).

A study undertaken by Sengar et al. (2009) showed various benefits of the use of a low cost solar dryer compared to sun drying, including a reduction of the time to reduce the moisture content of prawns by 15 to 16 percent as well as an improvement in colour and texture. It was estimated that the low cost solar dryer was affordable to local fishers, who could recover the investment cost of the solar dryer within a period of 0.19 years. In addition, this is a sustainable method of drying as it does not generate GHG emissions.