--- Page 5 ---

4

It is important to note that only 60 per cent of the respondents already had knowledge about the
concept of Social Farming before the meeting, mainly through the participation in projects,
practitioners and internet research.
Motivations
Regarding the motivations of inquiries on Social Farming 36 per cent of the inquiries refers to
agriculture as the main sector of interest in the area of Social Farming, specifically the potential of
the agriculture as a starting point to consolidate the communities, to increase the environmental,
social and mental resilience. The survey also shows the lack of information about Social Farming
with 31 per cent of inquiries stating that the main reason to go to the meeting was to learn and
share experiences and about 18 per cent were practitioners.
Benefits
The health benefits are recognized by 68 per cent of the inquiries, they attribute to Social Farming
therapeutic capacity of producing psychological and physical improvements to practitioners. It is a
way to inspire and develop social and personal competences, responsibility and work habits, to do
interventions and therapy. Practitioners recognise that users have several characteristics that are
improved like: the raise of self-esteem, dignity, personal valorisation. It is also mentioned the
reduction of relapses, re-internments, dislocations to hospital emergency and medication dosages
in psychiatric institutions.
One of the benefits recognised by the majority of the respondents (55 per cent) to Social Farming
is capacity to enhance capabilities of people usually marginalised by society and the capacity of
inclusion and integration in the society. The potential to provide to people with some limitations,
unemployed, in a precarious situation, a useful occupation and a sense of ability and contribution,
to make the interaction between the individual, with social disadvantage, and the community
through agriculture, for example regarding the possibility of using the food production for
subsistence. Dessein et al. (2010) state that Green Care is expected to offer new solutions and to
respond to specific problems in the areas of agriculture, health care and society. Through the
answers we can see that respondents consider that Social Farming provides a valuable link to
social integration and in medium-term can be a catalyst of social change/transformation.
Another important benefit of Social Farming is the capacity to create synergies with the
environment (27 per cent), reconnect people with natural cycles through agriculture, to provide
improved environmental services like the increase of biodiversity. The rediscovery of interpersonal