--- Page 6 ---

5

and environment relations promoted by Social Farming – valuation of these relations ahead of
purely economic concerns. Social Farming lead us to a bigger and better human and
environmental health, it raises environmental and ecological consciousness. Accordingly to 23 per
cent of the inquiries another important benefit is the production of abundance and consequently
improves the quality of life, it is a possibility to have an additional income. To become possible the
rehabilitation of agriculture in a more sustainable way, make it solid and resilient to future
changes.
Regarding the inquiries opinion (18 per cent), Social Farming can be a way to recover abandoned
rural and urban areas (urban agriculture); can be a way to revive degraded rural areas mainly
because it can be a powerful instrument that allows an agriculture recreation in functions and
forms. The results show that 14 per cent of the answers about benefits are related to the
community. Social Farming is seen as promoter of social diversity. It builds links and strengthens
community and local economy precisely through the approximation of community to food
production with a pedagogical and therapeutic nature of agricultural work.
Opportunities
Social Farming is a new concept that can help to redefine old concepts like economy and wealth.
In the area of the opportunities 36 per cent of the answers were related with environment,
referring that it can contribute to create better environment, as the recovering of degraded areas,
the use of nature friendly agricultural practices, like organic farming. In addition it can give
opportunities to a large number of people, in a sustainable way towards local development. People
identify Social Farming as a practice that raise the income of an institution or at personal level,
and that leads to an improvement of the living conditions to the more needed people, as self-
production systems of healthy food through the use of friendly agricultural practices. It allows an
equilibrated way of live and a happier and healthy society.
27 per cent of the respondents find opportunities in social area: social insertion and inclusion,
employment, through the creation of inter personal relationships; it can also be an efficient
method to fight the depopulation of rural areas. New employment related with a new area.
The survey shows that 23 per cent of respondents can find opportunities in Social Farming,
especially to the maintenance of traditional farming systems, to the recuperation and reactivation
of uncultivated areas, one opportunity of a sustainable approach of agriculture. It creates also the
opportunity for people to be in contact with agriculture and animal production. Social Farming will