--- Material and Methods ---

3

policies about Social Farming and linkage between institutions and practitioners is rare. Hence
initiatives are needed to stimulate the discussion about Social Farming between stakeholders and
their links to a multifunctional approach of Agriculture, trying to put it on the political and public
agenda. This arena of discussion could possibly be operationalized with the help of different
programmes like Leader+ and PRODER (www.proder.pt) (rural development) or established
networks – (national rural network - www.rederural.pt) could be carried out for projects of Social
Farming.
In Portugal we are in a point of new challenges in the area of Social Farming, we need innovations
to integrate the sectors of agriculture and social services. Taking the example of countries with a
Social Farming sector more developed is necessary to understand the development of Social
Farming initiatives and sector (Hassink, n.d.). This author focuses on the importance of
innovation, social network, niche management, social and institutional entrepreneurship,
implementation and development of new organizations. It is important to integrate different
approaches and inputs.
It is important to discuss new concepts and policies in the health and social care and how can
Social Farming be used within them (Sempik et al., 2010). The main topics that could be analysed
are physical health, mental health, outdoor spaces for education, rehabilitation, social inclusion,
therapy and the cost of Green Care and Social Farming compared with other forms of social care.
The aim of the present work intended to analise the questionnaire obtained from the participants
of the First Meeting of Social Agriculture in Portugal, having the background questions: what are
the benefits, opportunities and barriers for Social Farming in Portugal? In what stage of SF-GC are
we?

Material and Methods
Data was collected through the distribution of questionnaires with open questions to participants
of the First Meeting of Social Farming in April First 2011; at the end of the meeting 22 participants
delivered the fulfilled questionnaire. The topics contained in the questionnaire were: the benefits,
opportunities and barriers of Social Farming. The sample was composed around 70 per cent
women and 30 per cent men.

Results and discussion