--- Page 8 ---

7

The main motivations of the respondents in the meeting were, to share experiences and learn or
to be practitioners.
Health was recognised by the majority (68 per cent) of respondents, as a benefit associated with
Social Farming. Other benefits recognised are the capacity to enhance capabilities of people
marginalised by society, the power of inclusion and integration, the capacity to create synergies
with the environment that can also be a tool for environmental preservation and conservation.
Concerning opportunities of Social Farming environment implementation and organic agriculture
were the more referred areas. The social area with topics related with social inclusion was also
seen as a good opportunity.
We can say that the biggest barrier for Social Farming in Portugal is at the political level,
bureaucracy, lack of legislation and regulation to facilitate the implementation of the initiatives. It
is also needed a mentality exchange, in order to create in the general population a credibility to
Social Farming. The lack of coordination between competences and education of practitioners is
another important issue that was identified in the questionnaires as problem to break.
After the meeting and the analysis of the questionnaires we can say that there is space in the
Portuguese reality to Social Farming. During the meeting the participants were enthusiastic, and
after they understand better what kind of initiatives is possible to integrate in the Social Farming
concept.
Now in Portugal, and worldwide we are facing an economic crises, can Social Farming be a good
contribute to help facing some economic issues?
One thing is very clear, we really need to put Social Farming in the political agenda and to
legislate and cooperate within practitioners.
It will be very interesting to explore the GC and Social farming in the ambit of Social Economy (as
a transversal and multisectorial approach) as a response to the social and economic actual
context, creating new paradigms and solutions.

Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to all participants on the meeting and especially to those
that answer the questionnaire.