--- State of the art of Social Farming in Portugal ---

2

What are the main questions in this area? A number of new ideas, questions and approaches
result from the answers, indicating the importance of GC-SF in Portugal. This paper will present
this data and also highlight the challenges faced by GC-SF actors in Portugal.

Introduction
State of the art of Social Farming in Portugal
In the past few years the concept of Social Farming had been introduced in Portugal. In spite of
being a new concept there are several Social Farming practitioners for a long time. During the
COST Action 866 – Green Care in Agriculture, Pedro Mendes Moreira, as the Portuguese MC in the
action, started a national survey and identified several case studies of Social Farming in Portugal.
One of the biggest gaps found was the lack of interaction between those institutions (Mendes
Moreira et al., 2008).
Currently there are at least two European projects in the Social Farming area with Portuguese
partners. The MAIE project “Multifunctional Agriculture in Europe – Social and Ecological Impacts
on Organic Farms” with representatives from seven European countries that aims to develop ways
of spreading knowledge about Social Farming. The main objectives of the project are qualification,
network and link, spread knowledge and support rural areas through Multifunctional Agriculture –
Social Farming (www.maie-project.eu). The project DIANA “Disability in Sustainable Agriculture: a
New Approach for training of practitioners” unites social scientist and farm professionals and it is
related to the training of practitioners who works with mental or psychiatric disabled employed on
agriculture. The aim of the project Diana is to develop an integrated and joint training programme
for practitioners in order to make them able to face the complex reality of Social Farming
(www.projectdiana.eu).
In April 2011 the Escola Superior Agrária de Coimbra in cooperation with the Cerebral Palsy
Association of Coimbra, framed in the meeting of DIANA project organized the First Meeting of
Social Farming in Portugal (http://webgrau.weebly.com/encontro-agricultura-social.html). During
the meeting we had the opportunity to have lectures from several experts in Social Farming to
share experiences from different European countries and also from Portuguese practitioners. The
main goal of this meeting was to joint all interested parties and to create recognition to the
concept of Social Farming, trying to connect all practitioners sharing their experiences and take
notice of other institutions working in the same area.
The European Manifesto on the Added Value of Social Farming (Van Elsen) highlights the
importance of policies on Social Farming at the European level. In Portugal there are no national