--- Page 7 ---

6

be a model of therapy for all practitioners that work with specific groups (e.g. disadvantage, elder,
psychiatric).
The opportunities in health and therapeutic areas were referred by 18 per cent of inquiries. There
are opportunity to individual therapy, namely in mentally disabled area that can lead to
rehabilitation and inclusion. Used as an alternative to conventional therapeutic methods it shows
more efficient results, observed from practitioners.
Barriers
One of the big barriers identified by inquiries (40 per cent) is regulation and bureaucracy; these
barriers are translated in difficulties on the development of integrated activities. The majority of
Social Farming institutions depend on funds from the government, the lack of policies in Social
Farming is a problem in the recognition of the institutions and consequently on the attribution of
subsides. The lack of legal recognition makes the organization of practitioners to be very
complicated and creates difficulties also at the implementation level.
The mentalities changing limitation is considered a barrier by 32 per cent of the participants.
Some aspects of relevance enounced were: the lack of ethics concerning nature, the natural
challenges of the work with people in disadvantage situations, (des)information from the public
about Social Farming – prejudice, the underestimated value of the agricultural sector as a minor
activity, the enormous spread of agricultural production and the lack of education and information
of farmers, lack of civic consciousness.
Inquires identify the lack of coordination between competences another important barrier to break
(18 per cent). The problems created are the lack of double skills from the practitioners, the lack of
a cohesive body to provide the framework for Social Farming, with educational, agricultural,
informative and monitoring valences.
The 14 per cent of inquiries consider the lack of support in the conception, implementation,
monitoring of Social Farming projects one big barrier to the development of that area.
Conclusions
In Portugal there are people interested in Social Farming implementation. Taking in consideration
the limited number of enquires, and also that people who participate were interested on the topic.
A preliminary approach can be draw for future decisions. Data from enquires, indicates that 40 per
cent of the respondents never had heard about the Social Farming concept before the meeting.