--- . With China’s ---

8

have been clearly mentioned. It is important to note that the big food concept is not
explicitly linked to the WFFC yet. Thus, agricultural diversification has become a prime
option to ensure China's food and nutrition security.

Co-benefits of agricultural technology and diversification for food and
nutrition security
In achieving sufficient food production, China has substantially increased its
agricultural mechanization through strategies such as WFFC. While to date already
one-third of agricultural production has attained a high level of mechanization, the
majority still depends on traditional operations by smallholder farmers.
Adoption of agricultural mechanization faces two major challenges in China linked to
agricultural diversification. First, application of agricultural machinery is widely
anticipated to be incompatible with highly fragmented landscapes, large spatial and
temporal differences, and small production scale30. This is, because mechanization of
crop production is increasingly perceived as leading to intensive farming in simplified
and centralized systems. Such production systems cannot provide sufficiently diverse
products of better quality, and higher nutritional value. Second, even after WFFC
consolidated small-scale farms into large production areas, there is an insufficient
supply of and a lack of training on agricultural machinery in both consolidated and
fragmented production areas. According to Chinese-type modernization, an aging
farming population in China must reduce labour intensity while enhancing production
efficiency and boosting unit earnings to avoid farmland abandonment 31. With China’s
sustainability strategy in mind, these expectations cannot be met merely in simplified
and mechanized production systems, but must be supported by advances in digital
agriculture in diversified landscapes.
Digital or smart agriculture refers to data-driven management of agricultural production
systems, where characteristics of crops, soil, and climate are collected by different
technologies to support farmers’ decision-making and along the agricultural value