--- Asia and Africa ---

4

China’s food security discussion
China is the world’s second most populous country and aims to feed approximately
20% of the human population on 9% of the world’s farmland7. Over the past 50 years,
agricultural productivity in China has grown steadily at 4.6% per year 8. An increasing
population and wealth have also shifted Chinese diets from plant to meat-based foods,
which has resulted in sourcing agricultural products from countries in the Americas,
Asia and Africa 9. More than 70% of agricultural fields in China are below 0.64 ha,
which is much smaller than the world’s average smallholder farm size of 2 ha10. The
200-300 million smallholder farmers in China are highly susceptible to environmental
impacts11, suggesting that climate or pest-related supply fluctuations on smallholders
and their crop production will have strong implications for local and global food security.
Impacts of pest invasions or extended droughts on agricultural production - as
witnessed in and beyond China in recent years, have led to commodity price volatility
and a perceived need to maintain the use of agrochemical inputs.

Overall, China’s sustainable food production is challenged by an overreliance on
chemical inputs 12. The annual nitrogen application in China is on average four times
higher than globally (305 kg/ha and 74 kg/ha, respectively), but nitrogen use efficiency
(nitrogen use / harvested product) is only 60% in China (0.25 and 0.42, respectively).
From the 1950s to the beginning of the 21st century, annual pesticide production in
China has increased from 500 tons to 929,000 tons. As pesticide overuse increases
the carbon footprint of food, drives environmental pollution, compromises food safety,
and causes biodiversity loss, the Chinese government has now made great efforts to
mitigate pesticide overuse and promote alternative management schemes. Agricultural
diversification in conventional cropping systems can enhance ecosystem services
such as biodiversity, pollination, and pest control by 40%, 32%, and 23%, respectively,
without yield losses13. However, diversification practices without non-chemical inputs
can entail yield trade-offs, and, hence, a solid scientific base to balance environmental
sustainability and food security is critical.