--- Page 6 ---

6

demand. Diversification strategies do not conflict with these policies. Instead,
diversified systems offer long-term win-win outcomes between yields and other
ecosystems services compared to simplified systems17. In rice production systems, yield
and other services such as nutrient cycling and soil fertility can be optimized at the
same time in 81% of all known cases, but trade-offs exist for yield and climate
regulation15. For specific diversification practices, such as organic farming, uptake is
limited by strong yield – ecosystem service tradeoffs that are amplified by nitrogen
inputs18. For specific guidance, spatially explicit approaches can help to better
understand where diversification can help to optimize environmental and
socioeconomic
outcomes
in
China19.
Overall,
understanding
trade-offs
in
diversification implementation requires more empirical work to then guide targeted
implementation (Tab. 1).

Pollination and biocontrol to stabilize yields and reduce inputs
Agricultural diversification can enhance ecosystem services such as pollination and
pest control that subsequently increase crop yield, enhance yield resilience, and
ultimately underpin food security. In China, insect pollination is of great importance for
food security and is particularly critical for diverse and high-quality foods like fruits and
vegetables20. For example, insect pollination contributes to a respective 57 % and 25
t/ha increase in fruit set and yield in apple production. With the improvement of human
living standards in China, demand for pollinator-dependent crops such as fruits and
vegetables has recently increased, and their cultivation area has grown by a respective
45% and 15% over the past 20 years (Fig.2). China has also earned global acclaim for
its biological pest control approaches. For instance, industrial-scale production of
minute parasitic wasps (Trichogramma spp.) enables cost-effective pest control on
millions of hectares of maize, rice, sugarcane, and fruit crops21. Moreover, the
application of an insect-killing fungus (Metarhizium anisopliae) can effectively control
China’s most prominent rice pests while safeguarding beneficial organisms and on-
farm biota22. Thus, pollination and biological pest control are pivotal to food security