--- Page 3 ---

3

China is the leading producer of maize, wheat, potato, and rice, and has successfully
implemented sustainable development programs related to agriculture1. Sustainable
agriculture has been promoted to achieve national food security targets such as food self
sufficiency through the ‘well-facilitated farmland construction’ or WFFC approach. The
WFFC is introduced in China’s current national 10-year plan 2 to consolidate traditional
and often small-scale farmlands into large and simplified production areas to maximize
technology-based automation, and improve soil fertility and productivity. However,
research suggests that diversified and smaller farms faciliate ecosystem services, can
improve yield resilience, raise production quality, defuse human health threats, and
increase farm profitability3,4. As the early stage implementation of WFFC has not
considered ecological farmland improvements, it may miss long-term environmental
benefits for biodiversity conservation and ecosystem service preservation conducive to
yields5. Moreover, the nutritional status in China has changed significantly in recent
decades with undernutrition being dramatically reduced, but the prevalence of overweight,
obesity, and chronic diseases has increased. While a strategic choice and management of
crop and livestock species can improve nutrition, the environmental and production
benefits of agricultural diversification are currently not well interlinked with China’s food
and nutrition security discussions. In addition, most nationally grown crops rely upon
insect-mediated pollination and biological pest control services that are enhanced through
agricultural diversification. Lastly, the role of agricultural technology (sensu 6) for
socioeconomic benefits and the link with diversified agricultural production may provide
vast benefits for food security. Here, we focus on the opportunities and co-benefits of
agricultural diversification and technology innovations to advance food and nutrition
security in China through ecosystem service and yield benefits (Fig. 1). Our applied five-
point research agenda (Tab. 1) can provide evidence-based opportunities to support China
in reaching its ambitious food security targets through agricultural diversification with global
ramifications.