--- through diversified food supply. For example, the Central Rural Work Conference of ---

7

and nutritional diversity in China with biological pest control creating large potential to
reduce chemical inputs.

Implications of diversification for food and nutrition security
Agricultural production is key to enhancing nutrition, but the pathways from production
management decisions to nutritional benefits are complicated. At the landscape scale,
higher diversity can provide more nutrients23 and more diverse food to subsistence
farmers, particularly in rural areas. At the farm level, production diversity is mostly an
effective lever to improve the dietary diversity and nutrition of smallholder farmers in
developing countries24. Furthermore, the link between nutritional status and specific
food groups is important. For instance, high livestock diversity is associated with a
positive nutritional status among children and adolescents25. Moreover, crop diversity
highly relates to food accessibility and dietary diversity26. In China, studies confirm the
positive link between agricultural production diversity, dietary diversity in rural residents
and to be conducive for an increase of protein intake27.

While the links between diverse production and improved nutrition become better
understood globally, more research is needed to connect production and nutritional
status in China (Fig. 1). Especially, because the Chinese government has placed great
emphasis on food self-sufficiency and agricultural development in rural areas, as
highlighted in China’s most important agricultural policy (i.e., No.1 central document;
1CD) 28. Specific requirements were then introduced in important agriculture-related
meetings and documents to satisfy people's increasingly diversified food needs
through diversified food supply. For example, the Central Rural Work Conference of
China in 2015 and 2017 highlighted "the concept of establishing big agriculture and
big food". In 2023, 1CD emphasized again "establishing a big food concept and
accelerating the construction of a diversified food supply system"29. The methods of
diversifying agricultural production, such as crop-livestock systems and agroforestry,