--- Conceptualization, coordination, funding acquisition: TCW; Methodology: TCW; ---

10

amplify the benefits for ecosystem service preservation, yield stability, and climate
resilience40.

Outlook
During the past two decades, China has drawn a red-line policy to protect the quality
of its 120 million hectares of arable land and many important developments are already
emerging to improve ecological resilience in the agricultural sector11. In the major rice-
producing areas in Northeast China, conservation tillage will be applied in about 70%
of total cultivated land by returning straw to fields in 2025 41. Moreover, synthetic
pesticides will increasingly make room for biological pest control alternatives in food
and horticultural croplands. Smart agriculture and extended use of drip irrigation are
being promoted to raise resource use efficiency across the nation’s farming areas. The
establishment of 780 new science and technology centers will help transform China’s
smallholder agriculture from an intense to a sustainable intensification model39. Equally,
to reach ambitious goals in pesticide phase-down, several specialized ‘ecological pest
management’ research units have been established over the past years42. Major
benefits will also be reaped by tactically integrating the above practices with natural,
bred, or engineered varieties resistant to pests and extreme climate conditions. In
general, recent policies have advocated for a multidisciplinary research environment,
which now requires proper incentive structures to reward scientists for collaboration
instead of competition. In addition, to better link agricultural production diversity,
nutrition status, and technology innovation for Chinese food security, we propose a
five-point research agenda that requires strong interdisciplinary and multi-stakeholder
collaborations (Tab. 1). Overall, a cornucopia of human and environmental health
benefits awaits to be enjoyed, and effective policies in China are key to ensure that
science translates into practice.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, coordination, funding acquisition: TCW; Methodology: TCW;