--- Page 5 ---

5

Opportunities for agricultural diversification in China
Agricultural diversification practices include crop rotation, intercropping, crop genetic
diversification, non-crop diversification like flower strips, integrated crop-animal
systems and agroforestry. These practices can provide a range of water-, biodiversity-,
and soil-related ecosystem services13,14. For instance in rice production, a synthesis of
40 years of data from China and globally has shown that diversification improves
financial profitability, biodiversity and pest control while not affecting yields compared
to non-diversified rice paddies15. Wheat/maize intercropping systems have 22% higher
grain yields than monocultures and greater year-to-year yield stability16. In combination
with other non-chemical tactics such as releases of biological control agents or the
incorporation of organic matter and biofertilizer, diversification in China’s cropping
systems may benefit yields, yield resilience, and the environment.

Diversification can also help to adjust China’s WFFC to fully capitalize on ecosystem
service benefits to expand grain production and strengthen national food security as
part of the farmland consolidation strategy on 72 million hectares by 2030 2. The
existing WFFC focuses on improving land productivity by consolidating small fields into
larger ones, increasing soil fertility, and improving accessibility and irrigation. Yet, by
increasing field size and reducing semi-natural habitats5, land consolidation will likely
reduce landscape heterogeneity along with biodiversity and jeopardize ecosystem
services. Through diversification, WFFC can fullfil the requirements on ecological
conservation and environmental protection, for instance, by avoiding pesticide
application and by conserving or establishing semi-natural habitats at the landscape
scale. Integrating diversification practices in China’s major policies will leverage the
potential of on- and off-farm biodiversity to sustain and enhance food security across
the country’s diverse geography and ecosystems (Fig. 1) 5.

China has implemented strict policies to ensure sufficient farmland for rising food