--- Page 9 ---

9

chain. At the pre-production stage, optical sensors and multiscale phenotyping
platforms can help quantifying plant traits for genetic selection32, both of new or local
crop varieties. During the production stage, digital technologies are used to quantify
plant photosynthetic function, dynamic growth, and nutrient cycling based on the
biochemical characteristics of leaves33. Advances in embedded systems allows
standardized pollinator and pestcontrol monitoring for direct yield improvements34. For
the post-production period, digital technologies can help with pre-sale quality control
in both, the conventional and organic agricultural market35. There is, hence, not
necessarily a discrepancy but rather a synergy between diversified and sustainable
farming and the use of new technology but the links between them are not well
established.
The Chinese government has been passing policies that integrate digital technologies
in sustainable agricultural production (2024 1CD) 36. Digital agriculture to support or
replace mechanization through automated farm management is still in its infancy, but
an increase of up to 40% by 2025 is expected 37. This increase of digitization and
integration with diversification practices requires careful consideration of China’s
diverse geography and ecosystems. For instance, the agriculture Internet of Things
(aIOT) uses sensor data, drones, and specialized sensors to integrate real-time data
on crop phenology, pest incidences, and weather patterns, suitable for large-scale rice
production with different crop varieties. Agricultural robotics can advance automated
seeding, non-chemical weeding, and harvesting in any large scale crop production
such as apple orchards planted as agroforestry systems. Online market places faciliate
market access for farmers in rural areas and provide the convenience of selling
premium-priced and traceable products that can be bought online38. To faciliate
Chinese-type modernization, the government could further support the use of these
digital agriculture approaches in diversified farming landscapes5 by providing financial
incentives for technology development and training to faciliate implementation39.
Overall, mechanization approaches may interfere with agricultural production
diversification, but new technology innovations in diverse and small farms likey will