--- Page 10 ---

vertical farming, they show the improvements in crop yield and quality metrics, it can be concluded that these technologies are useful to enhance the agricultural resilience to economic water scarcity (Vallino et al., 2020).

The researchers can find out the degree to which the water scarcity response technologies are able to improve the crop yield and quality in regions that are experiencing water scarcity by correlating the different types of water scarcity with the agricultural productivity and quality indicators in the regions that are using the water scarcity response technologies. The statistical analysis of such data gives researchers the chance to find the patterns, trends, and correlations, and thus, they can prove the results by the facts about the water scarcity types and the response technologies which are the factors of the crop production outcomes.

In conclusion, the statistical analysis of water scarcity data helps the researchers to answer the research questions about the impact of water scarcity on crop production and the influence of water scarcity response technologies (Dinar et al., 2019). Through the investigation of the distribution of the water scarcity types and their relationship with the agricultural outcomes, researchers can get the important information about the water scarcity and its effects on the crop production, thus, they can use the information for the decision-making and the policy formulation for the agricultural resilience to the water scarcity.

These findings show that the water scarcity issues are not just one-dimensional and the problem has both environmental and economic aspects, thus, the need to be aware of these aspects to increase agricultural resilience is stressed. Through the use of such insights, policymakers, researchers, and agricultural stakeholders can make evidence-based decisions, which, in turn, will help to manage water sustainably, to adopt the new technology, and to ensure food security in the areas of aquaculture production (Bunge et al., 2022).

The technological solutions to the water shortage in aquaculture production are very important, and the analytical findings prove that these solutions are the right ones. For instance, if water scarcity response technologies are introduced in the areas with high AEWS levels and as a result, there is an improvement in the crop production and quality indicators, it means that such technologies can effectively increase the agricultural resilience to the economic water scarcity (Dolan et al., 2021).

By looking at the different degrees of water scarcity types and their relations with the agricultural productivity and quality indicators, it is possible to evaluate how water scarcity response technologies are helping to improve crop production and quality in water-scarce conditions. The statistical analysis of the data enables the researchers to find the patterns, trends, and correlations, which in turn, provides the empirical evidence to the conclusions about the effect of water scarcity types and the effect of the response technologies.

Moreover, the effects of these analytical findings on agricultural policies, technological adoption, resource allocation, and research priorities can be different. Taking into account these findings, the legislators might have to include economic aspects in the water management plans to deal with the effect of AEWS. It might be suitable to adopt policies that will encourage the use of water-saving technologies and economic incentives to lessen the negative effects of economic water scarcity on aquaculture production. Thus, the primary focus should be on the use of water-saving technologies such as the efficient irrigation systems or hydroponic cultivation which will in turn, increase agricultural productivity and also, will help in the resilience to the economic water scarcity (Cairns, 2024). Finally, the resource allocation decisions based on the information are crucial in the areas that are suffering from severe water scarcity. The customized investments in infrastructure and technological interventions that are tailored to the water