--- Image 1: Vertical Farming ---

scarcity challenges can help to optimize resource utilization and to promote sustainable
agricultural development.

Image 1: Vertical Farming

Image 2: Process of Vertical Agriculture
Vertical farming is the technology that can solve the water scarcity problems that are
mentioned in the analysis. It is an advanced agricultural technology that changes the old farming
ways by growing the crops in the vertical layers (Oh & Lu, 2022). This novel technique enables
the maximum utilization of land and the minimum of water usage, hence it is a very suitable
solution to the water scarcity problems in agriculture. In contrast to traditional farming, which
demands a lot of horizontal space, vertical farming uses agricultural technology to create the best
conditions for the crops, which is controlled by the environment. Another important principle of
vertical farming is its capability to produce more crops in a smaller area than conventional
agriculture. This is the result of the crops being grown in the tower-like structures, which can be
located in different places like shipping containers, warehouses, skyscrapers, and underground
bomb shelters (Linnea, 2023). Vertical farming is a method of growing crops by stacking them
vertically, thus, it makes it possible to grow a lot of crops in a small space and hence, it can be
used in both urban and rural settings (Vejgaard, 2022). In the case of vertical farming, artificial
lighting is of great importance in the process of giving the light energy that is needed for the
growth of plants. LED lights, fluorescent grow lights, and high-pressure sodium lights (HPS) are
the most popular methods of creating sunlight-like light and enabling photosynthesis (IMI,
2022). This means that the vertical farms can work independently of the seasonal variations in
the sunlight, thus having a year-round production capability. Furthermore, vertical farming is
based on other types of growing methods that do not use soil, such as aeroponics, hydroponics,
and aquaponics. The plant roots are suspended in the air and are sprayed with a nutrient-rich
solution, which is the way of getting the plants with the essential nutrients while at the same
time, the water efficiency is maximized. Hydroponics is a technique of growing plants directly in
a water-based solution that is full of nutrients, therefore, the soil is not needed and the water
consumption is reduced (Rajendran et al., 2024). Different inert materials like coconut fiber,
vermiculite, peat moss, perlite, and rockwool serve as a support for plant roots in the hydroponic
systems. To sum up, aquaponics is a combination of aquaculture and hydroponics, with the
plants and fish helping each other in a closed-loop system. To sum it up, vertical farming is a
feasible and effective way to solve the water scarcity issues in agriculture. Thanks to the