--- water scarcity, which are Green Water Scarcity (GWS), Blue Water Scarcity (BWS) and AEWS. ---

application of the latest technologies and the introduction of new farming techniques, vertical
farming is able to enhance water efficiency, save resources and promote environmental
sustainability. Vertical farming is a good method to increase food security, to manage the water
resources sustainably, and to make agriculture more resilient in water-scarce areas (Wang et al.,
2023). The research and innovation in vertical farming technology are the keys to the
improvement of its potential and the widespread adoption of it as a cornerstone of the future
agricultural systems.
Vertical farming becomes a versatile solution that can successfully solve the various types
of water scarcity problems. The tool in question is especially effective in the fight against GWS
due to its ability to control soil moisture levels precisely (AgTech, 2024). Through the provision
of precise irrigation and nutrient delivery to plants, vertical farming reduces the chances of the
soil moisture being too low that it will negatively affect the crop growth, hence it is a useful asset
in the GWS regions where there is not enough rainfall. Besides, hydroponic systems of vertical
farming greatly cut the water usage in contrast to the traditional soil-based agriculture methods,
thus, it is the best option to fight Blue Water Scarcity (BWS). These systems are the most
effective in transporting water and nutrients directly to the roots of the plants, thus making sure
that the plants are well hydrated and at the same time, the water wastage is reduced.
Therefore, vertical farming is a good way to solve the problems of BWS that are caused by the
overexploitation and the contamination of the groundwater resources. Although AEWS is the
cause of the economic problems, vertical farming's resource-efficient practices can be the
solution to these problems. Through the enhancement of production per unit of water input,
vertical farming makes the economic viability better, thus, it helps to solve the problems of
AEWS such as the fluctuating water prices and the supply instability. To sum up, vertical
farming is a versatile tool that can be used to deal with all the aspects of water scarcity, thus, it is
a holistic solution for sustainable agricultural development. Its capacity to deal with GWS, BWS,
and AEWS challenges shows its potential to increase the agricultural resilience and food security
in water-stressed regions.

5. [Conclusion]

To sum up, this in-depth investigation of the connection between water scarcity and
agricultural production reveals the importance of the issue of this critical global problem. A
multi-dimensional analysis has been carried out which has helped to unravel the complex
dynamics of water scarcity and its various types and their impacts on crop production. The
results prove the deep impact of water scarcity on agricultural resilience, which, in turn, shows
the necessity of innovative solutions to the problems of its negative effects.
Main points derived from the analysis show that the economic water scarcity (AEWS) is the
most important factor that influences crop production. This economic constraint proves the
significance of the use of technologies and practices that make water efficiency and economic
viability in agriculture possible. Vertical farming is a viable way of overcoming the three types of
water scarcity, which are Green Water Scarcity (GWS), Blue Water Scarcity (BWS) and AEWS.
Its capacity to increase the efficiency of water use, to maximize the crop yield, and to reduce the
environmental impact, makes vertical farming a fundamental element of sustainable agricultural
development.
On the one hand, the understanding and solutions of water scarcity have been improved, but on
the other hand, the limitations still remain. Our study is still inconclusive about the scalability
and accessibility of the vertical farming technologies, and their socio-economic implications are