--- scarcity like Green Water Scarcity (GWS), Blue Water Scarcity (BWS), and Agricultural ---

review process is the one of the evaluation of the previous research and the theoretical frameworks in order to get the general idea of the topics that are related to the research. Through the careful examination of the collected literature, reports, and policy documents, I detect the key themes, patterns, and trends, which helps me to get a better understanding of the correlation between crop production and water scarcity. Besides, the review of the document is a way of getting different viewpoints and finding new ideas. In the process of integrating and comparing the theoretical models and the related studies that are present in the existing literature, I examine the various factors and the mechanisms through which water scarcity affects crop production.

This all-round strategy makes the research more in-depth and wide-ranging, thus, it renders a complete analysis of the topic. Besides, the document review process also helps in giving the direction to the research and setting the basis for the further investigation. The theoretical frameworks and relevant topics found in the literature review act as the basis for the future steps and the focus of the research. To sum up, the qualitative methodology applied in this research is a good way of comprehending and evaluating the impact of water scarcity on crop production.

The various materials collected from the documents are the reason why the research is wider and deeper at the same time, and thus, the researcher is able to understand the complex relationship between the crops production and water scarcity more clearly.

Through the quantitative methodology, the researcher will be able to systematically and accurately collect and analyze the empirical data on water scarcity and its effect on crop production. Statistical methods are applied to study datasets with various indicators of water scarcity like Green Water Scarcity (GWS), Blue Water Scarcity (BWS), and Agricultural Economic Water Scarcity (AEWS) in order to find out patterns, correlations, and trends. The data collection process consists of the sourcing of data from the credible repositories, the governmental agencies and the academic institutions to make sure that the datasets used in the analysis are reliable and valid. In particular, statistical techniques like regression analysis are utilized to find the significant relations and trends in the dataset. Through the use of quantitative methods, the study aims to give concrete proof of the hypotheses regarding the unequal effects of water scarcity types and the efficiency of the response technologies on crop production. The main objective of the quantitative methodology is to assess the effect of water scarcity types and response technologies on crop production and to come up with statistically significant conclusions. These statistical methods help to check the hypotheses or claims, which in turn, gives the useful information for the formulation of the policies or strategies related to water scarcity or crop production.

I apply statistical techniques to the data that is empirical and I quantify the relationships between the water scarcity types, the response technologies, and the crop production results. In particular, I use statistical methods such as regression analysis to find the significant links and the patterns in my data set. Through the use of quantitative methods, I want to give factual evidence that will support my hypotheses on the different effects of water scarcity types and the efficiency of response technologies on crop production.

According to my literature review, I pinpoint the main concepts that are directly connected to my research queries, that is, water scarcity types, crop production outcomes, and the application of response technologies. For each construct, I set the particular ways to measure them in my study. For instance, water scarcity types are defined based on the duration of the scarcity periods (less than 1 month, more than 1 month), and the crop production outcomes include the yield quantity and the quality parameters (e. g. , the nutritional content, the market value).