--- Page 9 ---

Figure 1: Nature Communication Figure 2: Water Scarcity Distribution In Global Croplands
The table that shows the water scarcity in agricultural production that is analyzed in the
text, makes it possible to understand the different effects of the water scarcity on the crop
production. In this context, it's crucial to understand the definitions of the water scarcity types
presented: GWS, BWS, and AEWS are the three types of intelligent systems (Ingrao et al.,
2023). To start with, the GWS stands for the shortage of water in the soil that hinders the crop
growth (Rosa et al., 2020). It mainly takes place because of the lack of precipitation which
causes the soil to be dry and thus, the crops do not grow well especially during the critical
growth stages. After that, Blue Water Scarcity (BWS) scarcity is the condition of a deficit of
surface and groundwater resources, which are the basic needs for irrigation and other agricultural
purposes (Liu et al., 2017). It usually comes from the overuse of water resources, pollution, and
climate change that reduces the amount of water for farming. Furthermore, the Agricultural
Economic Water Scarcity(AEWS) is a term that depicts the economic consequences of water
scarcity on the agricultural areas (Chiarelli et al., 2022). It covers the elements that are related to
the price of water, the possibility of water-saving technologies, and the economic feasibility of
the agricultural methods in the water-scarce conditions. Every kind of water scarcity has its own
specific effects on agricultural productivity, which are based on the combination of
environmental and economic factors. AEWS is mainly the result of economic water scarcity, but
BWS and GWS may have environmental factors as their cause such as climate variability and
land management practices. The knowledge of these differences is necessary for the planning of
the unique strategies to solve the water scarcity problems and to increase the agricultural
resilience.

The data clearly shows that AEWS is the most influencing factor on the croplands during
the periods of prolonged scarcity (>1 month), affecting 86% of regions. This means that
economic issues connected to water shortage are the main reason for the drop in crop production.
AEWS is the representation of the economic limitations and problems of the agricultural regions
which are the difficulties they face in getting and using the water resources properly. Thus, the
information suggests that economic water scarcity, which is denoted by AEWS, is the most
significant factor in crop production compared to other types of water scarcity, such as GWS and
BWS.
The water scarcity response technologies are the ones that will be the main focus of the study on
the influence of water scarcity on crop yield and quality. The analysis of the data can give the
information on the effectiveness of these technologies in reducing the bad effects of water
scarcity on crop production. For instance, if areas that are facing economic water scarcity have
high levels of AEWS, and after they have adopted the water scarcity response technologies like