--- A LANDSCAPE APPROACH FOR POLICY ---

15 CSA SUCCESS STORIES A LANDSCAPE APPROACH FOR POLICY MAKING, PLANNING, AND MONITORING IN THE KAGERA RIVER BASIN A farmer in UGANDA with Sustainably manages his land 10 heads of cattle 20 beehives 1 acre fruit trees 1 acre pastures The goal of the Transboundary Agro-ecosystem Management Project for the Kagera River Basin (Kagera TAMP), funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and implemented by FAO, is to adopt an integrated ecosystem approach for the management of land resources in the Kagera River Basin. The Basin is shared by Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. Through a landscape approach the project helps restore degraded lands, sequester carbon, adapt to climate change and use agricultural biodiversity in a sustainable way while improving agricultural production, rural livelihoods and food security.

One of the farmers living in Kiruhura District, Uganda was inspired to take on the new way of herd management to improve his income after being introduced to better farming methods that enabled him to keep a small, high productivity herd while combining this activity with agricultural cultivations. He sold 150 heads of cattle to keep only 10 animals and managed to increase his income from milk while planting about 10 000 trees, one acre of fruit trees, pastures and leguminous fodders whose seeds he supplies to other farmers. In addition, his family benefits from gardens of maize, cauliflower and carrots in addition to 20 bee hives. He attributes the quick adoption of the new land management ways to Farmer Field School activities that promote farmer-to- farmer learning. Other farmers have benefited of the introduction of fruit trees by improving their nutrition and diversifying their income generating opportunities. Additional activities include communal tree nurseries which have enabled farmers to plant on bare hills over 150 000 trees in the area, both for timber and fruits.

A participatory multisector process to asses and map land degradation and sustainable land management (SLM) was carried out for the entire basin based on a method jointly developed by the LADA project (www. fao.org/nr/lada/) and executed by FAO with the support of the GEF/United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in collaboration with the World Overview of Conservation Approaches and Technologies Secretariat.

The assessment provided the baseline information and a harmonized territorial estimation of the tangible elements of the ecosystem’s good and services such as the impacts of land use and management practices on soil, water, biomass and biodiversity as well as its social and economic implications.

Decision makers in the four countries are assisted in analysing what type of land degradation processes are occurring, including those exacerbated by climate change, where they are happening, what are the trends and why and what are the expected ecological and socio-economic impacts. The data and maps are used to devise the best project intervention strategy, identify best SLM practices for scaling up and guide effective and responsive interventions at various scales. This process also informs policy making, planning and budgetary allocations by technical sectors at the district and transboundary levels and will establish a baseline for more integrated landscape management approaches.

A comparison of maps showing degradation and SLM effectiveness allows decision makers to identify areas requiring interventions, select good practices that can be scaled up, and choose additional SLM measures that are needed to address specific degradation problems.

Information gathered allows for landscape and territorial management among sectors and contributes to achieving multiple objectives, including sustainable productivity, enhanced resilience to climate variability and change, and climate change mitigation. This for more effective synergies among sectoral interventions and helps identify trade-offs that need to be addressed by all stakeholders. www.fao.org/nr/kagera 6