--- CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE FOR ---

9 CSA SUCCESS STORIES CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE FOR SMALLHOLDER FARMERS IN KENYA AND TANZANIA Launched in 2010, the FAO Mitigation of Climate Change in Agriculture (MICCA) Programme is working to make agriculture more climate-smart. It is building a knowledge base on what it will take to put climate-smart agriculture into practice. The project approach taken is to develop a selection of climate-smart agricultural practices for smallholder farmers based on participatory assessments and consultative processes at multiple levels within its two pilot projects in Tanzania and Kenya. The development of the “menus of practices” involves site-specific assessments of the adaptation, mitigation and food security benefits of a range of agricultural practices. Given the location specific nature of climate-smart agriculture, practices are identified based on the given agro-ecological and socio-economic situation of each pilot project.

Farmers from each pilot project participated in several consultations in the field to identify existing agricultural practices and their possible impacts. This allowed farmers to compose a menu of potentially suitable climate- smart practices that can be readily integrated into their current farming systems. The identification of these practices by farmers is followed by a set of trainings to facilitate the adoption and scaling-up. In addition, capacity development of CSA practices is strongly connected to an extension approach and incentive mechanisms (dairy farmer groups in Kenya and Farmer Field Schools in Tanzania) to promote the up-take of the different practices.

Some 2500 farmers in Tanzania and Kenya – 46% of which were women, received training on climate-smart agricultural resulting in: • 300 energy-efficient cooking stoves to reduce deforestation • 44 tree nurseries • 134 381 seedlings in stock and more than 33 500 tree seedlings planted • 235 terraces established to conserve soil and water • 2 biogas digesters to produce renewable energy from cow manure The relevance of the different CSA practices for individual farmers is shaped by institutions and socio-economic factors, including availability of and access to labour and land, as well as up-front investment costs, climatic risks, gender roles, and physical conditions such as soil fertility and health and access to water. In order to better understand the dynamics of adoption of the CSA practices and further inform agricultural policies and extension, MICCA will also analyse the constraints and factors driving adoption of CSA practices using the two pilot project sites as concrete cases.

As the ground work on practices moves forward, national workshops, specifically targeted to policy makers, will be conducted to help review the results of past and on-going CSA work and test decisions related to their priorities with decision makers at different scales. These meetings will be a good opportunity to review the use of CSA practices in Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions, National Adaptation Plans, and other mechanisms.

The FAO MICCA Programme is a multidisciplinary initiative that builds on FAO’s long-standing work carried out by its different technical departments and collaborates with international and national organizations. MICCA complements other FAO and United Nations efforts to address climate change and collaborates with the UN-REDD Programme. www.fao.org/climatechange/micca/79677/en/#approach 3