--- DEVELOPING CAPACITY TO UNDERSTAND & ---

21 CSA SUCCESS STORIES DEVELOPING CAPACITY TO UNDERSTAND & ADDRESS THE GENDER DIMENSIONS OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND AGRICULTURE IN INDIA Men and women are affected differently by the impacts of climate change and their responses also differ, especially when it comes to safeguarding their food security and livelihoods. Although women are important food producers and providers, they have limited access to and control of resources, on the one hand. On the other hand, because of their central role in agriculture, women are great agents of social change. Therefore, responses to climate change in agriculture must be gender-specific. Initiatives need to ensure that women are included in climate change adaptation and mitigation activities and strategies designed to enhance food security and livelihoods. To date, however, there has been little focus on how men and women mitigate risks and adapt to challenges brought about by climate change.

FAO’s work on gender and climate change in Andhra Pradesh, India, identified the need to improve research tools to better address gender and climate change research gaps. This research inspired a collaborative effort between FAO and CCAFS on an initiative aimed at better understanding and applying gender issues in their programmes. This joint effort embodies FAO and CCAFS’s shared vision of contributing to knowledge that informs new climate-smart agriculture actions. The FAO-CCAFS initiative is aimed at identifying the tools most useful for gaining a better understanding of current adaptation and mitigation strategies pursued by smallholders. It looks at what kinds of institutional arrangements and action research approaches can help ensure more equitable access to benefits of interventions aimed at enhancing resilience in the face of a changing climate. The FAO-CCAFS collaboration is developing training materials that address new approaches and issues, which have been identified in consultation with local CCAFS partners. The training materials cover three main research priorities: • Facilitating farmer exchange visits and other approaches for sharing adaptation strategies in ‘climate analogue’ areas - places where farmers today can learn about the climatic conditions they can expect to be dealing with in the future. • Assessing how to facilitate the use of daily and seasonal weather forecasts for farmers and how to make access to forecasts more equitable. • Understanding and catalysing gender-sensitive, climate-smart agricultural practices. www.fao.org/climatechange/micca/gender 9