--- SUSTAINABLE GRAZING FOR ---

7 CSA SUCCESS STORIES SUSTAINABLE GRAZING FOR BETTER LIVELIHOODS IN CHINA The restoration of degraded grasslands through sustainable grassland management includes reductions in grazing pressure on overstocked areas, the sowing of improved pastures and better pasture management.

It can lock more carbon in soils and biomass, increase the water-holding capacity of the soil and enhance grassland biodiversity.

The Three Rivers Sustainable Grazing Project is a pilot project in the Qinghai province of China that aims to address these challenges. The research and planning phases of the project have been completed with joint contributions from FAO, ICRAF and Chinese institutes including the Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development in Agriculture (CAAS) and the Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology. Investors and the Qinghai Government are currently discussing co-investment opportunities for implementation of the project. In the project yak- and sheep-herding households will select a combination of management options related to grazing intensity, grass cultivation and animal husbandry. The project’s goal is to restore degraded grazing land and sequester soil carbon, and at the same time increase productivity, build resilience and improve livelihoods in smallholder herder communities. The average annual mitigation potential in the first 10 years of the project were estimated at 63 000 tonnes of CO2 eqv. per year.

The primary selection criteria for this project was its high carbon sequestration potential, which was linked to the prevalence of heavily degraded grazing land (38 percent of the project area), and the availability of simple and cost-effective restoration measures. Also, by improving soil moisture and nutrient retention in soils, grassland restoration plays an important role in building resilience to climate change. Assessments revealed that restoration of degraded grazing lands would also significantly enhance the productive potential of the project site. Economic returns to herders will be enhanced by including a package of complementary measures, such as the introduction of improved feeding, winter housing, post-farm processing and marketing activities.

The project’s capacity to deliver economic returns is crucial, as it greatly increases the likelihood of voluntary herder enrolment, and improves the synergy between climate change mitigation and rural development objectives.

The project aims to finance its investment costs (e.g. for grass planting, fencing and animal housing) and cover income forgone due to temporary destocking, with funds mobilized from the voluntary carbon market. A key constraint to accessing carbon market finance is the absence of carbon accounting methodology that is cost effective for herders, but also sufficiently accurate for investors. To address this constraint, FAO has developed a carbon accounting methodology, based on the sustainable grassland management practices described above, that has been validated under the Verified Carbon Standard. Instead of relying solely on direct measurement, which is often prohibitively costly, this methodology permits the use of carefully calibrated biogeochemical models in combination with the monitoring of management activities to estimate soil carbon pool changes.

This important innovation significantly reduces the costs associated with measurement and verification and greatly facilitates access to carbon markets. While developed as part of the Three Rivers project, the grassland carbon accounting methodology will be applicable to sustainable grazing projects throughout the world. www.v-c-s.org/methodologies/methodology-sustainable-grassland-management-sgm 2