--- THE IMPORTANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY ---

11 CSA SUCCESS STORIES ANDEAN AGRICULTURE:

THE IMPORTANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY 3500 families In PERU in 18 rural communities help conserve 177 varieties of potatoes The Central Andes are a primary centre of origin of potatoes. Up to 177 varieties have been domesticated for centuries in the valleys of Cusco and Puno, not far from the famous Macchu Pichu. One of the most amazing features of this heritage is the terracing system used to control land degradation. Terraces allow cultivation in steep slopes and different altitudes in the high plateau, around Lake Titicaca. The system also helps maintain soil fertility. In the canals, silt, sediment, algae, and plant and animal residues decay into a nutrient-rich muck which can be dug out seasonally and added to the raised beds.

Nowadays farmers still cultivate the colourful traditional potatoes and quinoa varieties, each for a special climate and altitude condition. Genetic resources for food and agriculture will continue to represent key resources for building the resilience of this agro-ecosystem and providing suitable varieties and breeding stocks needed to adapt production to changing climatic conditions. Thus, their conservation and sustainable use are a prerequisite to cope with climate change. The GEF funded, FAO-led Global Partnership Initiative on conservation and adaptive management of “Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems” (GIAHS), in coordination with the Ministry of Environment, other local institutions and the participation of local communities, is helping value these ingenious agricultural technologies to guarantee their conservation, while providing sustainable development conditions for present and future generations of Andean peoples.

The GIAHS Initiative promotes public understanding, awareness, national and international recognition of Agricultural Heritage systems. Aiming to safeguard the social, cultural, economic and environmental goods and services these systems provide to family farmers, smallholders, indigenous peoples and local communities, the initiative fosters an integrated approach combining sustainable agriculture and rural development. This initiative has counted on the participation of 3500 families organized in 18 rural communities. In collaboration with national universities and research institutes as well as Puno Regional Government, FAO has promoted the conservation of agro-biodiversity of quinoa and potato cultivations. With these actions, FAO aims at developing appropriate technologies and measures to address the impact of climate change while strengthening the food and nutrition security of local families for current and future generations.

The FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture adopted a “Programme of Work on Climate Change and Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture” to promote the understanding of the roles and importance of genetic resources for food and agriculture in food security and nutrition and in ecosystem function and system resilience in light of climate change. www.fao.org/giahs/giahs-sites/central-and-south-america/andean-agriculture-peru 4