--- PROMOTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF UREA ---

19 CSA SUCCESS STORIES PROMOTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF UREA DEEP PLACEMENT IN NIGERIA THROUGH SOUTH/SOUTH COOPERATION The Urea Deep Placement (UDP) technique, developed by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) and International Fertilizer Development Center (IFDC), is a good example of a climate-smart solution for rice systems. The usual technique for applying urea, the main nitrogen fertilizer for rice, is through a broad-cast application. This is a very inefficient practice, with 60 to 70 percent of the nitrogen applied being lost, and contributes to GHG emissions and water pollution. In the UDP technique, urea is made into “briquettes” of 1 to 3 grams that are placed at 7 to 10 cm soil depth after the paddy is transplanted. This technique decreases nitrogen losses by 40 percent and increases urea efficiency to 50 percent. It increases yield by 25 percent with an average 25 percent decrease in urea use. UDP has been actively promoted by the Bangladesh Department of Agricultural Extension with IFDC assistance. In 2009, UDP was used on half a million hectares by a million farmers and there are plans to expand its use to 2.9 million more families on 1.5 million hectares.

The widespread adoption of the UDP technique in Bangladesh had important impacts: farmers’ incomes have increased thanks to both increased yields and reduced fertilizers’ costs. Jobs have been created locally in small enterprises, often owned by women, to make the briquettes. There are now 2 500 briquette making machines in Bangladesh. On-farm jobs have also been created as the briquettes are placed by hand, which requires 6 to 8 days labour per hectare. Higher yields and savings on fertilizer expenditures more than compensate for the additional field labour expenses. At the national level, imports of urea have been reduced, with savings in import costs estimated by IFDC at USD 22 million and in government subsidies of USD 14 million (2008), for an increase of production of 268 000 metric tons. At a global level UDP has reduced GHG emissions caused by the production and management of fertilizers. It also increases the agricultural system’s resilience. As fertilizers prices are linked to energy prices, and consequently very volatile, reducing fertilizer use also increases farm and country’s resilience to economic shocks.

With the efficacy of the technique now well proven, UDP is being up scaled, partly through South/South cooperation promoted by FAO. For instance, the National Programme for Food Security of Nigeria (NPFS) is supported by South/South cooperation with China. This support includes the promotion and development of the UDP technique in several Nigerian states. 8