--- CSA ON THE GROUND ---

1 CSA SUCCESS STORIES UNDERSTANDING THE CHALLENGES OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND FOOD SECURITY FAO estimates that food production must increase by at least 60 percent to respond to the demand of the 9 billion people that are expected to inhabit the planet by 2050. Given that one in eight people are currently food insecure, ensuring global food security over the next decades will be essential. In meeting this challenge, there is an opportunity to create sustainable economic growth in rural areas of developing countries where food security and poverty are most prevalent.

According to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), rising temperatures and increased frequency of extreme events will have direct and negative impacts on crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture productivity.

Climate change is a universal and critical challenge for global food security. Improving the way we manage agricultural systems and natural resources is fundamental for effectively achieving food security. We can no longer afford to separate the future of food security from that of natural resources, the environment and climate change – they are inextricably intertwined and our response must be as well.

Efforts to reduce food insecurity must include building the resilience of rural communities to shocks and strengthening their adaptive capacity to cope with increased variability and slow onset changes. The agricultural sectors (crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries) must therefore transform themselves in order to feed a growing global population and provide the basis for economic growth and poverty reduction. This transformation must be accomplished without hindering the natural resource base.

More productive and resilient agriculture requires a major shift in the way land, water, soil nutrients and genetic resources are managed to ensure that these resources are used more efficiently and sustainably.

Making this shift requires considerable changes in national and local governance, legislation, policies and financial mechanisms. This transformation will also involve improving producers’ access to markets.

FAO SUCCESS STORIES ON CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE CSA ON THE GROUND