--- PRESERVING THE AGRO-FORESTRY SYSTEM ---

5 CSA SUCCESS STORIES In3 years In the slopes of Kilimanjaro, Tanzania 120 000ha of agroforestry 25% Include coﬀee cash crops that will INCREASE income by PRESERVING THE AGRO-FORESTRY SYSTEM ON MOUNT KILIMANJARO The “Kihamba” agroforestry system covers 120 000 hectares of Mount Kilimanjaro’s southern slopes. The 800 year-old system stands out among agroforestry systems as one of the most sustainable forms of upland farming. Without undermining sustainability, it has been able to support one of the highest rural population densities in Africa, providing livelihoods for an estimated one million people.

This agroforestry system has a multilayered vegetation structure similar to a tropical mountain forest which maximizes the use of limited land, provides a large variety of foods all year round and provides substantive environmental services beyond the areas where it is practiced. Because of the high quantities of biomass it produces and its capacity to recycle organic matter on farms, the agroforestry system contributes significantly to carbon storage. The trees and dense vegetation help considerably to ensure that Mount Kilimanjaro can remain the ‘water tower’ for the region.

As an ecologically compatible cash crop, coffee allowed the agroforestry system to adapt successfully to the emerging cash economy. However, in the 1990’s, coffee prices on the world market plummeted at the same time as pests and diseases were increasing. Additionally, many coffee shrubs had reached an age (over 50 years) when they produce less beans. These factors led to a sharp decline in productivity and profitability. It is estimated that 20 percent of coffee cultivations in the area have been abandoned. If this continues, it will have massive environmental and socio-economic implications in the landscape around Mount Kilimanjaro especially on food security, carbon storage, water catchment and soil erosion.

Under FAO’s Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems Initiative (GIAHS), activities were piloted in 660 households to enhance farmers’ cash income while preserving the ecological and social integrity of the Kihamba system. The project implemented an action plan, formulated together with the community, with the following key activities: • Rethinking sources of cash income. Three interventions were agreed on: a) conversion to certified organic coffee farming; b) introduction of vanilla as a high value additional cash crop; and c) introduction of trout aquaculture along the canals of the irrigation system. • Rehabilitation of the irrigation system to reduce water loss and expansion of the capacity of storage ponds to cope with longer dry seasons due to climate change. • Training in sustainable land management. • The interventions in coffee management alone are expected to increase farm cash income by 25 percent in three years.

In addition, the project organized a Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) process to facilitate an informed and independent decision-making process by the community,. Preparatory consultations were held with local government officials, traditional elders, and women’s representatives, where the pros and cons of different development options were discussed. A crucial step to build support in the government was to engage focal points in a Project Facilitating Committee (PFC) and to work across sectors and levels, with agents with different expertise and government mandates. www.fao.org/giahs/giahs-sites/africa/shimbwe-juu-kihamba-agro-forestry-heritage-site-tanzania 1