--- ECOSYSTEM APPROACH TO FISHERIES ---

17 CSA SUCCESS STORIES ECOSYSTEM APPROACH TO FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE FOR FOOD SECURITY IN NICARAGUA the ecosystem approach to fisheries & aquaculture increases food & income from fish products In the Estero Real, Nicaragua while preserving ecosystem services & increasing resilience to climate change The tropical mangrove estuary Estero Real is located along the north Pacific coast of Nicaragua. The estuary was declared a protected site in 1983 while in 2003 it was recognized by the Ramsar Convention as an area of international interest. It is at high risk of degradation partly due to shrimp fisheries and aquaculture as well as agricultural practices, urban waste, mining and deforestation in the higher parts of the basin. Heavy sedimentation from poor watershed management, the increased use of pesticides and the loss of mangrove forests are also threatening coastal aquaculture, fisheries and biodiversity in the mangrove ecosystem. Climate variability and climate change are putting additional pressures on the estuary.

To protect this area national and local fisheries and aquaculture institutions in Nicaragua have led the implementation of the ecosystem approach to fisheries and aquaculture (EAFA) in Estero Real. FAO has supported this initiative through participatory planning and development of management plans. This approach allows fishers and fish farmers to maintain and increase food and income from fish products in the Estero Real, while preserving ecosystem services and increasing community resilience to climate change and other factors.

Thanks to this project, coastal fishery and aquaculture communities have become better informed and more resilient to the impacts of climate change and other threats.

Following extensive information gathering and support activities, stakeholders agreed on a management plan currently in place made up of four main components: • Improvement of environmental management of aquaculture and increased preparedness to climatic related stress by the development and implementation of a monitoring system of the aquatic environment. • Generation of alternative livelihood opportunities for small scale fishermen, mostly in aquaculture, to avoid negative fishing practices that might threaten biodiversity, ecosystem resilience and their own livelihoods. • Improvement of national/local governance and strengthening collaboration of different institutions that are involved in the management of the area including private sector. • Dissemination and communication of the management plan, to foster local involvement, create ownership and improve follow-up.

This approach has helped increase understanding of the need to improve linkages with other sectors such as agriculture and future steps will be taken to address this need. The process has facilitated and improved livelihoods for small scale fishermen and women that are now involved in two very successful shrimp farming cooperatives that are working in partnership with the national fisheries institution and larger scale shrimp farming cooperatives.

The EAFA management has helped local stakeholders become more aware of the impacts of climate change and other external threats and understand better the need to improve management of natural resources to increase their own resilience. www.fao.org/fishery/topic/16919 7