--- A READINESS PROJECT IN ---

13 CSA SUCCESS STORIES CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE:

A READINESS PROJECT IN MALAWI, VIETNAM AND ZAMBIA Guiding Investments Managing Climate Risk Assessing the situation Identify barriers & enabling factors Deﬁning coherent policies The builidng blocks for CSA policy implementation at country level FAO is implementing with partner countries the project “Climate Smart Agriculture: capturing the synergies among mitigation, adaptation and food security“. It aims to strengthen technical, policy and investment capacities of its three partner countries – Malawi, Vietnam and Zambia - to enable sustainable increases in agricultural productivity and incomes, resilience of agricultural and food systems to adapt to climate change and opportunities to reduce and remove GHGs in order to meet their national food security and development goals. The project was developed and is being technically supported by the EPIC Programme (Economics and Policy Innovations for Climate-smart agriculture) thanks to the support from the European Commission.

The project has developed a methodology for combining different types of data to build an evidence base on CSA practices, including incentives/barriers to adoption, mitigation-adaptation-food security synergies and trade-offs of different practice options (based on identification of food security and adaptation benefits, climate change indicators, mitigation potential and least-cost-investment options). In Zambia, this combined data has shown that some farmers face difficulties in adopting conservation agriculture (CA) practices, which potentially have productivity, adaptation and mitigation benefits. In some holdings, crop residues are needed for animal feed instead of soil cover and some households are too poor to wait several seasons for the benefits to materialize. However, CA appears to be used as an adaptation response in areas of pronounced climate variability. The findings also indicate entry points for agricultural policies to increase food security under climate change and for extension services.

The mapping of agricultural and climate change policy instruments, stakeholders/institutions and policy formulation and implementation processes is also being carried out with a view to enable greater policy alignment and more coordinated institutional arrangements. It also facilitates policy dialogues between Ministries in charge of agriculture and the environment to harmonize draft national agricultural and climate change policies, which have already resulted in adjustment of draft policies. In addition, the project has coordinated participatory scenario building workshops among a broad group of stakeholders to explore future uncertainties, contextual challenges, institutional vulnerabilities, policy and networking options. The partner countries have benefited from capacity building activities that include: • Support to MS and PhD students at leading universities to strengthen linkages between research and policy decision-making. • A CSA training manual for training of extension workers. • Support to the attendance by Ministry of Agriculture staff at UNFCCC negotiations to increase awareness of climate change issues within Agriculture Ministries, while strengthening the size and competencies of national delegations to UNFCCC sessions.

The evidence base and policy work developed by the project will be used in formulating investment proposals to support CSA implementation for which climate finance will be mobilized. In Africa, such proposals will be embedded in Comprehensive AADP Investment Plans. Funding is being sought for a second phase of the project, which would involve implementation and its up-scaling in the three existing partner countries, expansion of readiness to other countries and development of a new screening tool. www.fao.org/climatechange/epic/home 5